Joint Doctrine Publication 0-01UK Defence DoctrineSixth Edition
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-01 
UK Defence Doctrine
Sixth Edition

[Page 2: No extractable text]

i
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-01
UK Defence Doctrine
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-01 (JDP 0-01) (6th Edition),  
dated November 2022, is promulgated as directed 
by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre

ii
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via email at: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2022) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated).
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbeywood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk
Distribution
All DCDC publications can be demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and 
Operations Centre. 
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/IntranetUKStratCom/SitePages/
development-concepts-and-doctrine-centre-dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

iii
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Foreword
It is a pleasure to introduce the new edition of UK Defence Doctrine. The world has 
changed markedly since the last edition was published in 2014. The years of  
counter-insurgency operations have given way to a renewed era of great power 
competition. The pace of technological development and the growth of information 
has enabled new tools and tactics. And now our competitors are actively challenging 
the global order, with all that means for our defence, for our economic and energy 
security, and for international stability.
And yet the nature of warfare has not changed. It is still violent and brutal. It is still 
unpredictable, with the power to fuel instability and inequality worldwide, and to affect 
people everywhere.
This doctrine represents an evolution in our military thinking, combining the old and the 
new. It is a framework to modernise our capabilities and develop the culture we need 
for the future. The central tenets are familiar: mission command and the manoeuvrist 
approach, which are the traditional strengths of the UK Armed Forces. But we have 
introduced a third tenet to this edition – integrated action. This reflects the fact there 
are now five operational domains. But it also reflects the need to align our activity 
more closely with the other arms of government, and with our allies and partners. 
Successive governments have shown they expect the Armed Forces to be used. 
They want us to be out in the world, delivering more for our nation, whether traditional 
defence and security, or in support of trade and prosperity, while also demonstrating 
to our adversaries that we are ready, if required, to fight and win.
This publication is an intellectual handrail on our journey to become match-fit to meet 
the demands of state-on-state competition, more agile in how we work, and even 
more global in outlook. And it matters to all of us. Read it. Understand it. Discuss and 
debate it as part of your professional development. And, most importantly, apply it to 
what we do. Because we are privileged to be entrusted with our nation’s security and 
prosperity. And the more we do, and the better we do it, the stronger and safer we will 
become, and the more we enhance the nation’s authority in the world. 
 
 
      Admiral Sir Tony Radakin KCB ADC 
      Chief of the Defence Staff

iv
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
.

v
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Preface
Purpose
1. The purpose of Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence 
Doctrine (UKDD), 6th Edition is to guide the employment of the military 
instrument and to explain its utility. While UKDD is authoritative, it requires 
judgement in its application.  
Context
2. As doctrine, JDP 0-01 is connected to policy, strategy and concepts. 
While it must be coherent with, and refer to, these documents, they are not 
covered in detail. UKDD will be revised and revisited as the context develops 
over time, and as the philosophies and principles that guide the employment 
and utility of the military instrument evolve.
Audience
3. UKDD is relevant to all personnel within Defence, across government and 
to our allies and partners. It forms an essential part of professional military 
education to reinforce understanding as people progress through their careers.
Structure
4. UKDD is divided into three chapters. A brief synopsis of each is below.
a. Chapter 1 – The strategic context. Chapter 1 considers the enduring 
nature of war and the changing character of warfare. It highlights the 
changes to the strategic context and introduces the continuum of 
competition.
b. Chapter 2 – Employment of the military instrument. Chapter 2 
focuses on what guides the use of the military instrument of power. It 
explains the application of the military instrument developed through the 
formulation of strategy. It reiterates the doctrinal tenets of the manoeuvrist 
approach and mission command, and also introduces integrated action, 
an evolution of our doctrine. It describes the principles of war, the 
components of fighting power, and legitimacy and the use of force.

vi
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
c. Chapter 3 – Utility of the military instrument. Chapter 3 explores 
how the military instrument can be employed, highlighting the horizontal 
and vertical integration across hard and soft power, operational domains 
and levels of operations. It describes the types of operations that Defence 
conducts and also details Defence’s contribution to an active deterrence 
posture. 
Linkages
5. The philosophies and principles in this edition of UKDD are amplified in 
Allied Joint Publication-01, Allied Joint Doctrine and in subordinate keystone 
joint doctrine.1 A number of reference documents that add context to UKDD 
include:
• Global Britain in a competitive age: The Integrated Review of 
Security, Defence, Development and Foreign Policy (referred to as the 
Integrated Review throughout);
• Defence in a competitive age;
• How Defence Works;
• Defence Strategy 2022;
• The Good Operation;
• Integrated Operating Concept;
• Defence Experimentation for Force Development Handbook ;
• The Defence Capability Framework ;
• NATO 2022 Strategic Concept;
• NATO Military Strategy;
• Supreme Allied Commander Europe’s (SACEUR’s) Concept for the 
Deterrence and Defence of the Euro-Atlantic Area; and
• SACEUR’s Area of Responsibility-Wide Strategic Plan. 
1 All national joint doctrine can be found on the defnet doctrine homepage  with all 
unclassified doctrine also available externally at https://www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

vii
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Chapter 1 – The strategic context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – Employment of the military instrument  . . . . . . . 9
Chapter 3 – Utility of the military instrument  . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

[Page 10: No extractable text]

1
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Chapter 1
Section 1 – The enduring nature of war and changing 
                   character of warfare. . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – International context. . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Section 3 – Continuum of competition. . . . . . . . . 5
Chapter 1 considers the enduring nature of war and the 
changing character of warfare. It highlights the changes 
to the strategic context and introduces the continuum of 
competition.
© Onchira Wongsiri / Shutterstock.com

2
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
1
The strategic context
”
“Today, however, the international order 
is more fragmented, characterised by 
intensifying competition between states 
over interests, norms and values. A 
defence of the status quo is no longer 
sufficient for the decade ahead. 
 
 
Integrated Review, 2021 
 

3
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
1
The strategic context
Chapter 1
The strategic context
Section 1 – The enduring nature of war 
and changing character of warfare
1.1. The nature of war does not change; war is violent, competitive and 
chaotic. It is a fundamentally political activity. War and warfare are not 
synonymous, and there is more to war than warfare. Warfare – the conduct 
of war primarily, though not exclusively, by military means – has a changing 
character. The character of warfare is shaped by the pace and extent of 
technological, economic, societal and cultural change.
1.2. War can be variously described, including Clausewitz’s philosophical 
phenomenon of ‘violence to compel our opponent to fulfil our will’. In simple 
terms, war is defined as: a state of armed conflict between different countries 
or different groups within a country.1 War is the last resort for resolving 
irreconcilable political differences and warfighting remains the pre-eminent 
purpose of our Armed Forces.2
1.3. The character of warfare is changing rapidly, driven by the pace and 
pervasiveness of information and technological change, not least in terms of 
space and cyber, and in emerging and disruptive technologies. Distinctions 
between public and private, foreign and domestic, state and non-state, and 
virtual and physical are blurred. The root cause of conflict and violence exists 
1 Concise Oxford English Dictionary , 12th Edition, 2011. The term ‘war’ as used in this 
publication does not have any legal significance. See Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-46, 
Legal Support to Joint Operations  for an explanation of the legal framework governing 
military operations.
2 The terms ‘warfight’ and ‘warfighting’ are not defined in the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) or the UK. They are included in JDP 0-01 as they are in common use 
across Defence.
The future operating environment will not be limited by lines on maps 
or by geography.
 
Defence in a competitive age, 2021
“

4
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
1
The strategic context
where another actor has an exploitable vulnerability or where a perceived 
imbalance exists. Understanding these drivers of conflict and violence 
improves our responses to protect the most vulnerable, and understanding the 
motives of actors results in more successful outcomes in the longer term. This 
approach is known as human security.3 
Section 2 – International context
1.4. The strategic context is complex, dynamic and competitive. Pervasive 
instability defines the security environment and it is challenged by those who 
seek to transgress the rules-based international order, test national resilience 
and exploit the lack of seams in a global and interconnected world, not least 
through hybrid attacks and disinformation. Climate change will increasingly 
exacerbate fragility and drive geopolitical competition.
1.5. As described by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in its 
Strategic Concept 2022, the Euro-Atlantic area is no longer at peace. The 
norms of the multilateral system that has assured our security and stability 
for several generations has been violated through the Russian Federation’s 
actions in Ukraine. This represents another step in a recent history of coercion, 
subversion, aggression and annexation. Without seeking confrontation, the UK, 
along with our allies and partners, need to enhance resilience and strengthen 
deterrence and defence to meet this challenge; there is no guarantee the 
Russian Federation will not go further and threaten UK sovereignty, or that of 
our allies. 
1.6. Alongside the Russian Federation, which NATO views as the most 
direct threat to peace and stability in the Euro-Atlantic area, we also face 
diversifying, intensifying, persistent and proliferating challenges from other 
authoritarian actors, such as the People’s Republic of China, who seek to 
subvert international norms and undermine our interests and values. We need 
to counter this but remain open to constructive engagement. Threats also 
emanate from non-state actors such as violent extremists, cyber hackers and 
international criminal gangs. Terrorism, in its many forms, represents the most 
acute asymmetric threat to security and international peace and prosperity. 
Economic and political (and demographic) challenges across the globe, but 
especially in Africa and the Middle East, fuel instability and conflict, and open 
opportunities for coercive interference by strategic competitors. 
3 See Joint Service Publication 985, Human Security in Defence  for further detail, which 
includes considerations of a range of factors and cross-cutting themes.

5
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
1
The strategic context
1.7. In many instances, the goal of all these actors is to achieve objectives, 
ideally without fighting. Their aim is to break our willpower using attacks that 
would not prompt a warfighting response. This does not, however, suggest an 
absence of potential escalation to violence and armed conflict. Therefore, the 
capability to act with responsive and combat-ready forces remains a primary 
competence of Defence.
1.8. Threats to UK security and stability also require Defence to understand 
the domestic context in which it operates and is enabled (for example, as a 
resilient base for strategic outload, or as the source of recruitment, industry 
and innovation). Consensus for Defence activity will be underpinned by a 
compelling narrative for the UK population, often against competing domestic 
challenges (such as a pandemic), and a narrative which must be consistent 
and synchronised across all instruments of national power domestically and 
internationally.
Section 3 – Continuum of competition
1.9. Relationships between national governments, between groups and 
factions within a state, and between state and non-state actors are always 
competitive. The degree of competition at any given moment will dictate the 
position of a relationship on a continuum spanning from cooperation, through 
rivalry and confrontation, to possible armed conflict. The boundaries between 
the four are complex, dynamic and may be overlapping. The ‘continuum of 
competition’, shown in Figure 1.1, illustrates these relationships and shows the 
dynamic context within which Defence may be employed. © Drop of Light / Shutterstock.com
The Euro-Atlantic area is no longer at peace – Kyiv, Ukraine, 25 February 2022 

6
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
1
The strategic context
a. Cooperation occurs when states or states and non-state actors 
work together to achieve the same objectives. This provides the 
ideal basis for enduring stability. However, domestic and international 
relations normally involve some degree of discord, such as economic 
competition, even during periods of cooperation.
b. Rivalry occurs when two or more states or non-state actors  
have incompatible interests and contend for power in one or more 
sectors, whilst avoiding confrontation or conflict. Rivalry is normal in 
international relations and most states compete within the framework of 
the rules-based international order. Certain states use ways and means 
to create a form of strategic competition aimed at undermining their 
target’s status and values for their own interests.
c. Confrontation occurs where differences can no longer be 
reconciled, and adversaries oppose one another with hostile intent.  
It can result from misperception and miscalculation.
d. Armed conflict exists whenever there is a resort to armed force 
between states or protracted armed violence between governmental 
authorities and organised armed groups within a state. As to whether 
any particular intervention crosses the threshold so as to become an 
armed conflict will depend on all the surrounding circumstances. 4 The 
terms ‘war’, ‘warfight’ or ‘warfighting’ are sometimes used to describe 
situations that amount, in law, to an armed conflict.
Figure 1.1 – The continuum of competition
4 See Joint Service Publication 383, The Joint Service Manual of the Law of Armed 
Conflict, 2004 Edition, paragraphs 3.3 and 3.3.1.
Stance
Responding nation’s stance
Competition
Decreasing
Increasing
Confrontation
Rivalry
Armed conﬂict
Cooperation

7
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
1
The strategic context
Key points
• The nature of war does not change; the character of warfare is changing 
rapidly.
• The strategic context is increasingly complex, dynamic and competitive. 
• Where human security cannot be achieved there is an increased 
probability of continued conflict and violence. The Russian Federation 
has violated the norms of the international system. This defines the 
security environment for the UK, NATO and our allies and partners.  
• Our rivals are pursuing a strategy designed to undermine cohesion, to 
erode political, social and economic resilience, and to challenge our 
strategic position in key regions of the world. Their goal is to achieve 
objectives, ideally without fighting.
• The capability to act with responsive and combat-ready forces remains a 
primary competence of Defence.
• The UK needs to be prepared for an era of competition: having a 
strategic approach, consistent but flexible over the long-term.
• The degree of competition at any given moment will dictate the position 
of a relationship on a continuum spanning from cooperation, through 
rivalry and confrontation, to possible armed conflict.

[Page 18: No extractable text]

9
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Chapter 2
Section 1 – Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Section 2 – Tenets of doctrine . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Section 3 – Principles of war. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Section 4 – Fighting power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
Section 5 – Human security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Chapter 2 focuses on what guides the use of the military 
instrument of power. It explains the application of the 
military instrument developed through the formulation of 
strategy. It reiterates the doctrinal tenets of the manoeuvrist 
approach and mission command, and also introduces 
integrated action, an evolution of our doctrine. It describes 
the principles of war, the components of fighting power, and 
legitimacy and the use of force.

10
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
Strategy is the bridge that relates 
military power to political purpose. 
 
Colin Gray, Modern Strategy  
”
“

11
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
Chapter 2
Employment of the 
military instrument
Section 1 – Strategy
2.1. Policy and strategy.  National political objectives and desired outcomes 
are articulated in policy and implemented through strategy. Policy is a 
statement of intent, or a commitment to act. Strategy integrates policy ends 
(what we need to achieve) with ways (how we will do this) and means (the 
resources we need) to support decision-making and achieve successful 
outcomes. Policy and strategy are interdependent. Policy ends can only 
be achieved if there is a credible strategy to deliver them, and strategy 
demands an achievable policy end state as well as a willingness to act and a 
commitment to resource the strategy. 
2.2. Effective strategy.  The goal of a strategy is to fulfil a vision. Strategy 
informs the plan and resources necessary to achieve success in a coherent 
manner, increasing the probability of achieving policy objectives. Given the 
increasing complexity of the multipolar international system and the growing 
threats ranged against the UK, its allies and partners, clear and effective 
strategy is more important than ever. To be effective, the military instrument 
must be employed as part of an integrated national and international 
strategy. As well as clarity of purpose, effective strategies have several 
other characteristics. Taken collectively, these characteristics give strategy 
‘substance’ and ensure that it is more than just a politically expedient narrative, 
but aligns ‘power, commitment and national interest to political realities’.5
5 Patrick Porter, ‘Why Britain Doesn’t Do Grand Strategy’, The RUSI Journal, 2010.
The UK is renowned as a thought leader and is envied for its ability 
to bring together the instruments of power.
 
Sir Stephen Lovegrove,
speaking at the Council on Geostrategy, 16 September 2021
“

12
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
2.3. Instruments of national power.  National strategy directs the integrated 
use of national power to achieve policy ends. Doctrine has traditionally 
characterised three instruments of national power – diplomatic, military and 
economic – with information as the latest addition.
a. Diplomatic.  The diplomatic instrument of national power uses 
diplomacy to manage international relations in support of national 
interests.
b. Information.  The information instrument of national power is the 
application of the UK’s institutional narrative using information activities 
(including strategic communication) in support of national interests. 
Information activity is underpinned by information technologies.
c. Military.  While warfighting remains the pre-eminent purpose and 
core competence of the military instrument, the UK is also adapting its 
forces to operate and compete more effectively below the threshold of 
armed conflict. This requires us to think differently about employing the 
military instrument.
d. Economic.  Economic success provides the foundation for security, 
stability and prosperity, and can be exploited to encourage desirable 
attitudes and behaviour. Economic and military levers are closely 
connected and are often employed together to achieve aims.
In the contemporary context, we must think beyond the four instruments to a 
broader range of civil-military responses, such as bringing together defence, 
diplomacy, development, intelligence and security, trade and aspects of 
domestic policy in pursuit of national and alliance objectives.
2.4. Integrated approach.  The UK government pursues its objectives by 
leveraging the four instruments of national power. Military forces are rarely 
used in isolation but are often integrated and synchronised with partners 
across government. This provides more options for decision-makers to use all 
of the instruments of national power towards common national goals. This is 
referred to by the UK government as the integrated approach and is similar to 
the comprehensive approach used by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO).6 This is coherent with the new military doctrine of integrated action that 
describes how the military instrument is employed in an interconnected world 
and across operational domains.
6 See the Integrated Review and Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine  for 
further detail.

13
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
Defence supports a range of activities focused on agreed objectives with  
the intent of delivering desired strategic outcomes
2.5. Defence strategy.  The Ministry of Defence is both a department of state 
and a strategic military headquarters. Employing a campaigning approach, 
Defence strategy aligns corporate strategy (namely, organising and managing 
Defence resources to generate capability) and military strategy. Defence in 
a competitive age sets out what the Integrated Review means for Defence. 
Defence Strategy 2022 translates the four Integrated Review objectives into a 
set of Defence strategic outcomes (the changes we want to make in the world) 
and Defence enabling outcomes (the changes we want to make to ourselves). 
Defence strategy is designed to be iterative. It sets the framework for Defence, 
and will be systemically evaluated, allowing Defence’s high-level strategy to be 
continuously assessed and validated.
2.6. Military strategy.  Military strategy is a subset of Defence strategy. 
Military strategy comprises the high-level direction and employment of the UK’s 
Armed Forces in campaigns, usually as part of an integrated UK response with 
allies and partners, focused on contributing to the desired outcomes set out 
in the national strategy. Military strategy is fundamentally about choices and 
priorities. Based on analysis it creates a theory of change between the present 
and a desired future state or condition, providing flexible options on how best 
to arrive there, expressed in coherent and clear terms.

14
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
2.7. Implementing strategy.  We need to be as pre-emptive and anticipatory 
as emergent opportunities allow. However, strategy is rarely implemented in a 
straightforward manner. As a strategy is implemented it will unavoidably need 
to be adapted to changing circumstances, in particular the actions of rivals and 
adversaries, as well as events that could not have been foreseen in advance. 
While every effort will be made to hold to the original policy ends, these may 
need to be rethought and ways and means adjusted. In this respect  
strategy-making is a continuous process. 
2.8. Campaigns.  A campaign is defined as: a set of military operations 
planned and conducted to achieve a strategic objective.7 Campaigns are set 
out in military strategy and orchestrated through operational art.8 Traditionally 
we associate campaign management with the operational level, although, 
for example, space effects, special forces and offensive cyber are routinely 
planned at the strategic level. Given that the current strategic context requires 
greater integration of all instruments of national power, campaign management 
must be conducted at the strategic level as well as the operational level. 
Section 2 – Tenets of doctrine
2.9. The successful employment of the military instrument is guided by the 
three tenets of doctrine described in this chapter. Mission command remains 
our enabling command philosophy and will be enhanced through our ability 
to gather, process, evaluate and transmit data at speed and empower our 
people to make faster, better decisions. The manoeuvrist approach continues 
to seek indirect approaches and to exploit success. However, in today’s 
complex and dynamic environment, where pervasive information allows a 
much broader audience to judge our actions, our third tenet has evolved to 
ensure the continued successful planning and execution of operations – this 
is now called integrated action. Such activity has previously been termed ‘joint 
action’; however, this is now considered too narrow and too focused on: the 
role of the military instrument; the enemy rather than the audiences; ‘jointery’ 
7 NATOTerm.
8 For further detail see AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine  and AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
the Planning of Operations .
Strategy walks on two feet, one deliberate, the other emergent.
 
Henry Mintzberg and James A. Waters,
Strategic Management Journal, Volume 6, 1985
“

15
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
at the operational level; and integrating the traditional three operational domains 
of maritime, land and air at the expense of space, cyber and electromagnetic 
domains; and on national rather than collective (alliance) outcomes.
The manoeuvrist approach
2.10. The manoeuvrist approach is directly focused on the enemy. It has two 
specific requirements. 
a. An attitude of mind.  The manoeuvrist approach is based on an 
attitude of mind that seeks indirect solutions, pitching strength against 
vulnerability, the use of initiative to act in original ways and a relentless 
determination to retain the initiative and exploit success. It depends on 
practical knowledge, agility, mission command and the willingness to 
accept risks.
b. Understanding.  Understanding helps us to identify audiences’ 
vulnerabilities (including the population) and how these might be 
exploited, as well as our own vulnerabilities and how these might 
be protected. Centre of gravity analysis can be a useful tool for this. 
Commanders must also understand their own centre of gravity and 
critical vulnerabilities and protect their forces accordingly.
2.11. The manoeuvrist approach seeks to out-think and outmanoeuvre 
competitors and potential adversaries physically, cognitively and virtually across 
the operational domains.9 The manoeuvrist approach seeks to seize and hold 
the initiative, shape understanding, and undermine will and fracture cohesion.
a. Seizing and holding the initiative.  Seizing and holding the initiative 
aims to impose multiple and simultaneous dilemmas. Significant features 
are momentum, tempo, deception, simultaneity, pre-emption and agility 
which, in combination, aim to achieve surprise and induce shock.
b. Shaping understanding.  The manoeuvrist approach seeks 
to manipulate understanding to produce favourable attitudes and 
behavioural outcomes in selected audiences. The perception of failure is 
the best mechanism to promote actual failure.
c. Undermining will and fracturing cohesion.  Will and cohesion are 
indivisible. Will is the determination to persist in the face of adversity. 
9 Physical, cognitive and virtual dimensions are described in AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine .

16
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
It has two aspects: intent and resilience. Cohesion is linked to all the 
components of fighting power. Our will and cohesion must be protected 
from the actions of adversaries. Will and cohesion can be targeted 
through dislocation, disruption and ultimately destruction.
Integrated action
2.12. Integrated action can be described as the audience-centric 
orchestration of military activities, across all operational domains, synchronised 
with non-military activities to influence the attitude and behaviour of selected 
audiences necessary to achieve successful outcomes.
2.13. Successful integrated action begins with commanders being clear 
about the outcome they seek; they need to study the audiences relevant 
to achieving the identified outcome and analyse the effects they wish to 
create on those target audiences. Only then should the mix of capabilities 
be determined to create physical, cognitive and virtual effects across the 
operational domains to affect the understanding, physical capability, will and 
cohesion of the audiences to achieve a successful outcome. These lethal and 
non-lethal capabilities may belong to the force itself, or intergovernmental, 
inter-agency, non-governmental, private sector or multinational actors involved 
in the operation. Activities can be conducted by, with or through partners. 
What is important is for commanders and staff to work out how to orchestrate 
and, where capabilities lie outside the force, synchronise all the relevant levers. 
Understanding the audiences is the major consideration of integrated action.
2.14. An audience-centric approach10 recognises that people are at the 
heart of competition; it is their decisions and behaviours that determine how 
competition is conducted and resolved. Audiences are segmented into three 
general categories – public, stakeholders and actors – depending on their 
ability to affect our outcomes, as depicted in Figure 2.1. A sophisticated 
understanding provides the focus for planning and executing activity to create 
or maintain the attitudes that constitute behaviour. Commanders, with an 
understanding of the strategic narrative, can then conduct target audience 
analysis to identify the effects that they wish to create.
              
10 NATO uses the term behaviour-centric rather than audience-centric.

17
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
               Figure 2.1 – Audience-centric approach
2.15. Multi-domain integration.  Multi-domain integration (MDI) is a concept 
and as such articulates developing thinking on the future of Defence. The 
intent of MDI is to ensure Defence develops into a whole that is greater 
than the sum of its parts across the ‘operate’ and ‘warfight’ spectrum. It 
therefore provides a force development philosophy: the need to join-up policy, 
process, people, information and promote integrated capabilities across the 
five operational domains. The greatest benefit will come from being able 
to sense, understand, plan and then orchestrate combinations of activities 
across operational domains in concert with the other instruments of national 
power, NATO and other like-minded allies and partners. Strategic Command 
as Defence’s integrator is responsible for realising Defence’s ambition for MDI, 
with its MDI Change Programme responsible for leading and catalysing the 
change. By integrating the five operational domains, MDI seeks to move us 
beyond joint and provides the wherewithal to draw upon and exploit as many 
capabilities as possible, including non-military, to create multiple dilemmas 
that can unhinge a rival’s understanding, decision-making and execution. 
By improving our ability to sense, understand, decide, generate options and 
tempo across multiple operational domains, and act with greater precision, 
MDI will improve our ability to conduct integrated action and thereby achieve 
successful outcomes.
Stakeholder – can affect or is affected by the attainment of the end state
Friendly                Supportive                Neutral                Unsupportive                Hostile
Public – aware of activities that may affect the end state
Actor – actions are affecting the attainment of the end state
Attitude/behaviour
All audiences will have an attitude ranging from friendly to hostile
Will and capability
Partner Adversary
Neutral Enemy
RivalAlliance

18
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
Mission command
2.16. The employment of the military instrument is enabled by mission 
command. Command is the authority vested in an individual of our Armed 
Forces for directing, coordinating and controlling military forces. The way 
command is exercised within our Armed Forces is described as their 
command philosophy. Mission command is founded on the clear expression 
of intent by commanders and the freedom of subordinates to act to achieve 
that intent. Mission command is a form of decentralised decision-making, 
which promotes initiative and the ability to dictate tempo, but which is 
responsive to superior direction. Mission command is essential to integration 
and integrated action at the lower operational and tactical levels. Integration 
is complex; commanders may need to cohere activity from across the force 
and the different levels of operations, integrating multi-domain actions that are 
delivered at speeds ranging from the speed of light to walking pace, to create 
multiple synchronised effects in the engagement space.11 
2.17. Mission command emphasises the importance of making a timely 
decision, and the importance of understanding the intention of the 
commander. There is a responsibility to fulfil that intention based on clear 
understanding of common doctrine, mutual trust between commanders, 
obedience to orders and the initiative to act within any freedom of action 
given, or purposefully in the absence of further orders. Trust is a prerequisite 
of mission command. Trust – by commanders in their superior’s plans and 
by commanders in their subordinates that they will sensibly interpret their 
intent and persevere to achieve it – can only be developed through shared 
experience, training and testing. Trust is earnt and cannot be demanded. 
Commanders will decide the extent of delegation based upon the specific 
context and judgement of their subordinates. A commander must understand 
which subordinates will thrive and excel with fewer constraints, and which 
will require more direction and control. This is likely to inform the kind of tasks 
different subordinates receive.
11 Engagement space is described in AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine . Engagement space 
and battlespace have been agreed by NATO as synonyms. The UK’s preferred term is 
engagement space.
Never tell people how to do things. Tell them what to do and they will 
surprise you with their ingenuity.
 
General George Patton
“

19
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
Section 3 – Principles of war
2.18. The principles of war reflect war’s enduring nature within the context 
of the changing character of warfare and inform and guide the way in 
which we apply the military instrument. The principles of war are not an 
exhaustive list, nor are they rules to be rigidly followed, but they do provide 
comprehensive considerations for planning and executing campaigns and 
operations. Underpinned by understanding and the three tenets of doctrine, 
their expression, emphasis and application change in relation to context. 
Except for selection and maintenance of the aim, placed first as the master 
principle, the relative importance of each of the principles will vary according 
to context. Applying them requires judgement, common sense and intelligent 
interpretation. The rapidly changing character of warfare, driven by the 
pervasiveness of information and pace of technological change, informs 
their contemporary relevance and, by extension, the evolution of two of the 
principles: ‘concentration of effects’ replacing ‘concentration of force’; and 
‘integration’ replacing ‘cooperation’.
Selection and maintenance of the aim
2.19. Regarded as the master principle of war, selection and maintenance of 
the aim provides focus. It enables military strategy and an outcome-focused 
execution at all levels of command. It is a reference point to assess progress, 
prevents unnecessary activity and conserves resources.
2.20. It is founded on understanding, as insight and foresight are required for 
effective decision-making. Yet the complexity and uncertainty of the strategic 
context, amplified by the ‘noise’ of pervasive information, makes selection and 
maintenance of the aim harder to achieve. A flexible and iterative approach can 
help ensure strategies and plans remain valid because uncertainty, chance, 
political reality and insufficient understanding of a situation may prevent the 
selection of a single aim from the outset.
Principles of military art shine in history like the sun on the horizon, 
so much the worse for blind men incapable of seeing them.
 
Napoleon Bonaparte
“

20
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
Morale is susceptible to external influences, including public opinion
Maintenance of morale
2.21. Maintenance of morale provides the will to fight. High morale is 
characterised by steadfastness, courage, confidence and sustained hope. 
Morale manifests itself as staying power and resolve, as well as the will to 
prevail despite provocation and adversity. It is a product of: inspired political 
and military leadership; the legitimacy of operations; a shared sense of 
purpose and values; well-being; confidence in equipment; and training that 
forges fighting spirit, moral cohesion and calculated risk taking without fear  
of failure.
2.22. Morale is susceptible to external influences, including public opinion. 
The will to fight is substantially reinforced and sustained by the belief that the 
nation supports us; therefore, the media’s contribution is important. Positive 
reporting reassures Service personnel that they enjoy national support and 
public recognition. Equally, adverse media reporting can erode morale.
Offensive action
2.23. Underpinned by fighting spirit, offensive action implies a vigorous, 
incisive approach to exploiting opportunities and seizing the initiative. The 
principle of offensive action is reflected in assertive and confident campaigning 
that confronts threats early and proactively.

21
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
2.24. Critically, applying offensive action does not preclude defensive action 
when required and is not synonymous with killing and destroying – although 
that might be necessary. It is better to strive for the imposition of will at the 
least possible loss, recognising the willingness to accept political and military 
risk, but not to gamble.
Security
2.25. Security entails balancing the likelihood of loss against achieving 
objectives. Skill in command is, therefore, a foundation of security. It is a 
shield that can help conserve fighting power and affords freedom of action, 
when and where required to achieve objectives. It demands managing risk, 
protecting high-value assets (including data and networks) and resilience.
2.26. Security contributes to preparedness and deterrence but does not 
demand overcommitting our resources to guard against every threat or 
possibility, thereby diminishing relative fighting power. Bold action remains 
essential to success.
2.27 . Lack of security, or a false interpretation of the principle of security, 
leads directly to being surprised. Commanders should anticipate the effects 
of being surprised and make appropriate contingency plans to safeguard their 
freedom of action.
Surprise
2.28. Surprise, in its direct meaning, presupposes the unexpected. Whether 
achieved through physical or virtual methods, or a combination of both, 
surprise achieves a cognitive effect – a feeling of relative confusion, or perhaps 
shock – that can undermine an opponent’s cohesion and morale.
2.29. Surprising an opponent is a significant way of seizing the initiative and 
may be a critical precondition for success. It is transient and must be exploited 
rapidly. Deception is closely related to surprise and requires deliberate 
measures to mislead targeted decision-makers into behaving in a manner 
advantageous to achieving our objective.

22
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
Concentration of effect
2.30. A commander must balance the concentrated delivery of lethal and 
non-lethal capabilities at critical points and times and increasingly at greater 
range and dispersal to realise effect. This must be done in concert with other 
national instruments to generate the most appropriate blend of hard and soft 
power.
2.31. Concentration applies to all operations and requires unity of effort 
through integration. Commanders must accept that achieving concentration 
demands economy elsewhere.
Economy of effort
2.32. Economy of effort may be described as the effective and efficient 
application of the components of fighting power: conceptual, moral and 
physical.
2.33. Commanders must prioritise resources between all campaigns, 
operations and activities. Economy of effort is best summarised as creating the 
right effect, in the right place, at the right time, with the appropriate resources. 
An important first step to success is to conserve our own strength and to 
force an opponent to dissipate theirs. Effective risk management will enable 
economy of effort and is aligned with the manoeuvrist approach.
Flexibility
2.34. Flexibility is the ability to change readily to meet new circumstances 
and comprises the adaptability, versatility, resilience and responsiveness of the 
whole force – both mental and physical aspects. Really flexible organisations 
are highly responsive. Responsiveness is a measure of speed of action, 
reaction and of how quickly the initiative can be seized or regained.
2.35. Adaptability is an increasingly important aspect of flexibility. Adaptability 
is not solely adjusting to new external conditions or responding to adversaries; 
it is also about our ability to learn rapidly and respond to internal stimuli to 
change. The quality of our people, their creativity and resourcefulness provide 
our adaptive edge. This must be combined with a willingness to take risk, 
the creation of an innovative instinct, experimentation and the ability to field 
capability quickly.

23
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
Integration
2.36. To integrate is to combine or be combined to form a whole. Integration 
has an amplifying effect that must support and not hinder the adaptability 
of the force. It may be likened to the connective tissue that knits all the parts 
of the force together whilst retaining the benefit of diverse perspectives and 
approaches.
2.37. The effectiveness and efficiency of the force is improved through: 
mutual trust and goodwill; a common aim; and integration across operational 
domains and through strategic, operational and tactical levels of operations. 
Integration is therefore closely associated with the principles of concentration 
of effect and economy of effort.
Sustainability
2.38. Sustainability of a fighting force is a critical enabler of fighting power’s 
moral and physical components and helps to enable freedom of action.12 It 
is anchored on a resilient and capable strategic base at the heart of a global 
support network.
2.39. Sustainability directly influences the tempo, duration and intensity 
of activities, and exploited effectively it allows constant pressure to lessen 
an adversary’s will to fight. It is an enabler of operational agility and reflects 
our preparedness and resolve, and therefore contributes to deterrence. 
The ability to sustain activity is a factor in assessing the feasibility of an 
operation. Increasingly, our operations will need to be delivered sustainably.13 
This will include making Defence activity less dependent on fossil fuels and 
successfully managing the energy transition to a more diverse mix.
12 Sustainability is defined as: the ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of 
combat power for the duration required to achieve its objectives.  NATOTerm.
13 In this instance sustainably is used as an encompassing term for activity that is 
delivered in a manner that minimises adverse effects by aligning to environmental, social 
and governance positive practice.

24
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
Section 4 – Fighting power
2.40. Fighting power determines the ability of our Armed Forces to operate 
and warfight. Fighting power’s hierarchy consists of a pre-eminent moral 
component (the will), a conceptual component (the thought process) and a 
physical component (the means). This is shown in Figure 2.2. Each component 
mutually supports and informs the other. The changing character of warfare 
requires adaptation of our fighting power if we are to function successfully.
Figure 2.2 – The components of fighting power
• Personnel
• Equipment
• Training and
   collective performance
• Sustainability
• Readiness     
Physical 
•  Leadership
•  Followership
•  Culture
•  Warﬁghting ethos
•  Moral cohesion
•  Motivation
•  Moral integrity
Moral
‘the will’
‘the means’  
•  Strategic analysis
    and assessment 
•  Concept
  development
•  Doctrine
Conceptual 
‘the thought process’
Generated by force development
Human force is threefold: it is mental, moral and physical, but none 
of these forms of force can be expended without influencing the 
other two.
 
Major General J F C Fuller
“

25
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
 Moral component
2.41. The moral component concerns the ability to get people to fight. Many 
theorists and all practitioners of war have pointed to the significance of the 
moral aspect in fighting.14 For Clausewitz it was so important, ‘with uncertainty 
in one scale, courage and self-confidence must be thrown into the other to 
correct the balance.’ The moral factor is difficult to define. It is often summed 
up in the term morale which Napoleon quantifies in his statement that: ‘morale 
is to the material [physical] as three is to one.’ Maintenance of morale is a 
principle of war and as such embraces both the moral and physical aspects 
of fighting power. High morale will stem from sound training, confidence in 
equipment and good administration, as well as confidence in commanders, 
discipline, self-respect and a clear knowledge of what is going on and what is 
required. Yet the ability to get people to fight is not just a question of morale, it 
will also require consideration of the features detailed below. 
2.42. Leadership.  Leadership is a variable combination of example, 
persuasion and compulsion. It is the projection of personality and purpose to 
influence subordinates to prevail in demanding circumstances. Leadership at 
all levels is the principal element in maintaining morale. The effectiveness of the 
whole force is dependent on military and civilian leadership at all levels. While 
natural leaders are rare, training and experience can develop latent potential. 
Leaders should consider the following.
a. A leader’s foremost duty is to those they lead, they must know 
their subordinates, and they must always place the care of their 
subordinates before themselves.
b. Effective leaders must demonstrate integrity, strength of character, 
judgement, initiative and professionalism. They must respect the 
diversity of those they lead.
c. The style of leadership should be adapted to the circumstances.
d. To gain the respect and commitment of their subordinates, leaders 
must demonstrate professional competence, fair discipline and moral 
courage.
14 The 2022 Ukraine conflict has demonstrated the Clausewitzian trinity of the power of 
people, government and armed forces working together to generate significant national 
resilience and the will to fight.

26
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
Commanders should seek as inclusive an approach as possible
e. Leaders should engender in their subordinates the confidence that 
breeds initiative and the acceptance of risk and responsibility.
f. In the face of adversity, leaders must demonstrate courage and 
contain their own fear.
g. Subordinates’ perceptions of their leaders are based on their 
reputation, demonstration of competence, personal example and 
authority.
2.43. Followership.  Followership is the act or condition of following an 
appointed leader. Good followership is as vital as strong leadership, and its 
benefits achieve unity of purpose. Commanders should seek as inclusive an 
approach as possible. Effective collaboration requires flexibility, openness and 
sensitivity toward all stakeholders. Followership does not preclude initiative and 
the important role of challenge, which are essential to mission command and 
good decision-making.
2.44. Culture.  The deep and distinctive organisational cultures of Defence 
have emerged and evolved over centuries. Comprising complex traditions, 
practices, organisational structures, artefacts and unwritten norms, our 
cultures underpin effective fighting power and our warfighting ethos. But they 
are also the cause of deep-seated behaviours and cognitive biases across all 

27
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
ranks and grades in Defence such as groupthink, tribalism, ‘can-do’ mentality, 
presentism, cultural blindness, and consent and evade mindsets. This can 
hinder change and innovation and often contributes to poor decision-making, 
breaches of discipline, unacceptable behaviours, systemic and human failings 
that lead to errors, incidents and accidents. Defence also contributes to 
changes in wider national strategic culture. As Defence adapts at pace, we 
must safeguard positive aspects of our organisational culture while seeking to 
identify and change those that hold us back.15  
2.45. Warfighting ethos. Warfighting ethos is the characteristic spirit of the 
cultures of our Armed Forces manifested in our attitudes and aspirations. It 
provides us with the vital moral, emotional and spiritual capacity to overcome 
fear and cope with the visceral and highly ambiguous nature of war; it is crucial 
to instilling courage and human resilience in our personnel who are required 
to fight. Warfighting ethos unifies those who serve and emerges out of the 
complex processes, practices and norms of the cultures of our Armed Forces. 
It is inculcated in our people particularly through leadership, tradition, unit 
cohesion, training and discipline. 
2.46. Moral cohesion. Moral cohesion underpins the moral courage to fight 
and keep on fighting. It is built on shared experiences, a common sense of 
worth, discipline and collective identity. It is sustained by shared common 
values and standards. Commanders should consider three aspects.
a. Professional ethos. Derived from identifiable and intangible 
qualities of each Service that promote a fighting spirit and determination 
to succeed.
b. Self-esteem. Derived from a sense of belonging to a highly 
capable, professional organisation.
c. Tradition. A sense of heritage and professional reputation 
strengthens team cohesion.
2.47. Motivation. Motivation is a product of training, confidence in equipment, 
leadership, management, reward, welfare, discipline and mutual respect. 
Motivation and morale are interdependent. Motivation can be affected by 
external influences (including public opinion), which can reassure or erode 
15 For more on overcoming cognitive bias see Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 04, 
Understanding and Decision-making , Ministry of Defence (MOD), Red Teaming Handbook 
and MOD, Reasonable Challenge: A Guide, 2017.

28
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
morale. Motivation is underpinned by the perceived legitimacy of operations. 
When members of our Armed Forces assume the legal right and duty to apply 
lethal force they relinquish many rights and freedoms enjoyed by civilians 
and accept the liability to lay down their lives in the service of the nation 
when required. In return, the nation promises that those who serve, or who 
have served, and their families are treated fairly through the Armed Forces 
Covenant.16  
2.48. Moral integrity. Moral integrity provides the foundations upon which 
both cohesion and motivation are built and requires individuals to understand 
right and wrong. It is instilled by personal discipline, education and training, 
and reinforced through the values and standards expressed by each Service. 
Commanders are responsible for the moral integrity of their units and for 
ensuring that our operations are conducted in accordance with the relevant 
legal frameworks.
Legitimacy and force
2.49. The effective employment of our military instrument is dependent on 
its legitimacy. The activity of UK Armed Forces, including the use of force and 
its doctrine, is subject to national and international law. Military objectives and 
the conduct of UK Armed Forces remain subject to relevant civil control by 
ministers accountable to Parliament. Applying combat power will be limited to 
that which is necessary to attain the desired end state and legally permissible.
2.50. Law is central to conflicts. The use of UK and international law by those 
opposed to the UK government’s conduct of Defence activities, so called 
‘lawfare’, has a real impact on how we do our business. Lawfare influences our 
priorities and informs permissions. The law can be used by adversary states 
to undermine the legitimacy of the UK government’s position directly, or by 
civil society proxies through vexatious litigation to prevent or slow activities. 
We must ensure that our legal frameworks continue to allow us to meet our 
ethical standards while reflecting the realities of the operating environment and 
16 Information can be found at https://www.armedforcescovenant.gov.uk
Let whoever is in charge keep this simple thing in [their] head (not, 
how can I always do this right thing myself, but) how can I provide for 
this right thing to always be done?
 
Florence Nightingale
“

29
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
its tempo. Furthermore, maintaining legitimacy is crucial to campaign authority. 
It builds morale and promotes cohesion, both within a force and between 
coalition partners, and confers both the freedom to act and constraints on 
military activity. We must be mindful of the risk of vicarious liability when 
operating with partners.
2.51. Legitimacy encompasses the legal, moral, political, diplomatic and 
ethical propriety of the conduct of military forces at both an organisation and 
individual level. Legitimacy is based upon both subjective perceptions, such as 
the values, beliefs and opinions of a variety of audiences, and demonstrable, 
objective legality. Therefore, the audiences and their perceptions of legitimacy 
will vary with each operation. It follows that the authority for military action, 
both legal and political, should be articulated clearly to members of our Armed 
Forces, the public, international audiences, and to our opponents and their 
domestic populations. The potential for the law to be used against us must be 
anticipated in operational planning. Equally, we must be robust in calling out 
our adversaries’ abuses of the law.
Conceptual component
2.52. The conceptual component provides a framework of thinking 
within which military personnel can develop understanding about both 
their profession and the activities that they may have to undertake. It has 
relevance at all levels of operations and depends on the development and 
exploitation of human qualities such as critical thinking, challenge, diversity 
of thought, foresight, resilience and adaptability to build the agility that 
Defence needs to succeed. The conceptual component reflects accumulated 
experience, improvements to existing practice (gained through lessons and 
experimentation) and analysis of the future security environment. It is the 
distilled experience of many years of making strategy and of mounting and 
conducting operations, disseminated and implemented through a variety 
of means, including publications and professional military education. The 
conceptual component comprises: strategic analysis and assessment; 
concept development; and doctrine.

30
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
2.53. Strategic analysis and assessment.  Strategic analysis and assessment 
is the analysis of current and future trends and plausible outcomes to provide 
the context for long-term decision-making. It informs and supports the 
development of Defence policy and capability. It is conducted through three 
interconnected activities:
• developing understanding of the strategic context for Defence;
• supporting policy and strategy by building the evidence base; and
• challenging the assumptions that underpin policy and strategy.
2.54. Concept development.  A concept is defined as: an agreed notion 
or idea, normally set out in a document, that provides guidance for different 
working domains and which may lead to the development of a policy.17 Concept 
development is the application of a deliberate methodology to:
• explore, understand and define Defence problems;
• determine possible solutions that guide how forces will operate; and
• influence the policies and capabilities that are required to enable the 
force to achieve success.
Concepts propose solutions to challenges and opportunities for which no 
doctrine exists or for which existing doctrine is inadequate. They contain 
a combination of informed judgement, underpinned by available evidence, 
and must be developed through experimentation designed to discover new 
information, test a hypothesis or validate a solution or choice. Concepts can be 
initiated from across a broad spectrum of activity including: operational lessons; 
technological advances; policy and strategy changes; academic research; and 
horizon-scanning. A concept must be sufficiently detailed to be tested and 
developed through experimentation and it must be validated by demonstrating 
a clear and substantial paradigm shift in the way we operate. Ultimately, a 
successful concept should be translated into doctrine. 
2.55. Doctrine.  Doctrine is defined as: the fundamental principles by which 
military forces guide their actions in support of objectives. It is authoritative 
advice but requires judgement in application.18 Doctrine can be simply 
described as considered thought on the best way of doing things now. It 
interprets ideas about war and how they affect its conduct and character by 
combining conceptual ideas and operational lessons into functional guidelines 
for action. Doctrine can also be used as an agent for change. The UK follows 
the NATO Standardization Policy and uses Allied joint doctrine where it can 
17 NATOTerm.
18 NATOTerm.

31
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
Defence invests in its people to provide the decisive edge
to guide operational-level commanders and staff.19  The Development, 
Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is the UK lead for Allied and UK joint 
doctrine development. Doctrine for the tactical level comprises Allied tactical 
publications, UK joint tactics, techniques and procedures (produced by the 
Directorate of Joint Warfare) and UK single-Service tactical doctrine.
Physical component
2.56. The physical component of fighting power provides the means to 
operate and warfight. It comprises personnel, equipment, training and 
collective performance, sustainability and readiness.
2.57. People. Defence’s success depends on its people; they are the critical 
component of Defence capability. As a consequence, it is essential there 
are sufficient, capable and motivated people to continue to give Defence 
its competitive edge. This demand is met through investment in recruiting, 
developing and retaining a high-quality, diverse workforce of the right mix of 
Regulars, Reserves, civil servants, industry partners and contractors. Rather 
than only relying on superior fire power and technical capabilities, and the skills 
our people require to exploit them, our leaders must seek out, develop and 
exploit human qualities such as critical thinking, diversity of thought, human 
resilience and adaptability to build the agility through which Defence will 
succeed. As the force structure changes in response to the changing character 
of warfare, so too must our employment models to maximise the advantage we 
seek.
19 Chief of the Defence Staff/Permanent Secretary Directive, Putting NATO at the Heart of 
UK Defence, 13 July 2012.

32
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
2.58. Equipment.  A credible fighting force depends upon sufficient and 
effective equipment, optimised and scaled according to strategic direction. 
Equipment is purchased in an evidence-based manner within resource 
constraints. Wherever possible it must be designed to be technically 
interoperable across Defence and with allies and partners. Projecting and 
employing a force demands a sustainable equipment capability programme. 
Informed by Defence Force Development, including both strategic need and 
conceptual innovation, our equipment acquisition programme should be 
underpinned by both sustainable and robust manufacture and supply, as well 
as flexible and affordable through-life support.
2.59. Training and collective performance.  The current strategic context 
requires Defence to think about training and associated activity as a surrogate 
for warfare. Conditioning personnel for adversity and the changing character of 
warfare begins with initial training and continues through demanding collective 
training. This should entail the right balance of live and simulated training 
and match the character of the likely operating environments as closely as 
possible. It must be designed to generate innovation and adaptation and build 
warfighting ethos. Collective performance is characterised by the high levels 
of cohesion, confidence and proficiency achieved by units and formations 
that have trained or operated together. Where time and resources allow, this 
should be achieved by individual Services preparing their respective force 
elements for joint activity. Thereafter, collective performance should focus on 
contributing to joint and multinational operations and integrating personnel 
and equipment, and the activities’ effects on potential adversaries and allies. 
Collective performance is also optimised when it integrates industry partners 
and contractors within the force.
2.60. Sustainability.  The ability to sustain operations is an essential element 
to generating credible and effective fighting power and which affects the moral 
as well as the physical component. As such it is a UK principle of war. It is, 
however, vulnerable to macroeconomic changes as equipment programmes 
and materiel costs may vary. It is enabled by combining:
• logistics, which links the strategic base (including infrastructure, 
stock and industrial capacity) with deployed forces through the 
Defence Support Network;20 
• personnel and administrative force structures;
20 See JDP 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations  and AJP-4, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Logistics.

33
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
• health and medical support;
• training and equipment;
• infrastructure; and
• communications and information management.
2.61. Readiness.  The UK holds forces and supporting capabilities at varying 
states of readiness (routinely measured in days and hours) consistent with the 
assessed risks and threats. Readiness is defined as: the period measured 
from an initiation order to the moment when the headquarters or unit is 
ready to perform its task from its peacetime location (permanent or forward 
deployed) or ready for deployment.21 Readiness postures:
• balance the time needed for force generation, preparation and 
deployment with available resources;
• comprise a combination of capacity (how much of the force 
is usable within a certain time frame, in itself underpinned by 
equipment availability), capability (relative to an adversary), 
interoperability (an absolute requirement and potential mitigation for 
capability gaps) and sustainability (provision of sufficient materiel to 
ensure the deployed force is fully prepared to operate); and
• can contribute to deterrence by demonstrating our preparedness 
and resolve.
2.62. Notice to effect.  Readiness is complemented by notice to effect, which 
is the time allowed for units to be at a location of employment, creating a 
prearranged effect, with an agreed capability. It includes readiness, mounting, 
deployment time, and reception, staging, onward movement and integration 
(if required), including time to integrate with international allies as part of a 
multinational force. As notice to effect is situation specific and may not be able 
to be predetermined, force elements are not routinely held at a defined notice 
to effect.22 Responsiveness requires force resilience, speed of recognition, 
speed of decision-making and speed of assembly, as much as readiness.
21 JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
22 See Defence Strategy 2022.

34
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
2
Employment of the military instrument
Section 5 – Human security
2.63. Closely associated with legitimacy and the use of force, as described 
under the moral component, is the essential requirement to consider aspects 
of human security, including countering conflict-related sexual violence. This is 
essential to a compelling narrative; thereby maintaining the UK’s and its allies 
and partners’ legitimacy and campaign authority. In contrast, the absence of 
human security is a vulnerability of many authoritarian states and non-state 
actors. Human security describes several considerations that, if ignored 
or compromised, are drivers of instability. These include factors of human 
insecurity, such as personal/physical, political, food, health, environment/
climate, economy, cultural, information and a number of cross-cutting themes. 
The cross-cutting themes are:
• protection of civilians;
• women, peace and security;
• effect of armed conflict on children and youth;
• impact of conflict on modern slavery and human trafficking;
• criticality of building integrity and countering corruption in affected 
areas;
• imperative to protect cultural property; and
• importance of preventing and countering state and non-state 
adversaries.
2.64. Addressing human security considerations in a coherent manner 
contributes toward more sustainable security outcomes and supports mission 
success. It requires the military to better understand how human insecurities 
affect individuals, communities and other actors. This understanding allows 
the military to plan operations that minimise harm to civilians, reduce human 
rights violations and achieve conflict-sensitive outcomes. Defence must take 
responsibility for coordinating human security in its areas of operations when 
operating and warfighting in all five operational domains. It is UK and NATO 
policy for Allied and UK joint doctrine to consider human security.

35
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
2
Employment of the military instrument
Key points
• Strategy integrates policy ends (what we need to achieve) with ways  
(how we will do this) and means (the resources we need). 
• The UK’s national strategy integrates all instruments of national power in 
pursuit of national policy aims to secure our national interests. 
• Defence strategy aligns corporate strategy (namely, organising and 
managing Defence resources to generate capability) and military strategy.
• Military strategy is a subset of Defence strategy and comprises the  
high-level direction and employment of the UK’s Armed Forces in 
campaigns.
• As a strategy is implemented it will unavoidably need to be adapted 
to changing circumstances. Whilst ends should, by and large, remain 
constant, these may need to be rethought and the ways and means 
adjusted.
• The UK has three core tenets of doctrine. The requirement for the 
manoeuvrist approach and mission command endures. However, in 
today’s complex and dynamic environment our third tenet has evolved to 
ensure the continued successful planning and execution of operations – 
this is now called integrated action. 
• The principles of war reflect war’s enduring nature. However, the rapidly 
changing character of warfare, informs the evolution of two of the 
principles. 
• Fighting power’s hierarchy consists of a pre-eminent moral component 
(the will), a conceptual component (the thought process) and a physical 
component (the means).
• The effective employment of our military instrument is dependent on its 
legitimacy.
• It is an essential requirement to consider human security in operations.

[Page 46: No extractable text]

37
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Chapter 3
Section 1 – Smart power, operational domains 
                   and levels of operations. . . . . . . . . . 39
Section 2 – Categorising operations . . . . . . . . . . 44
Section 3 – The Defence contribution to deterrence . . 49
Chapter 3 explores how the military instrument can be 
employed, highlighting the horizontal and vertical integration 
across hard and soft power, operational domains and levels 
of operations. It describes the types of operations that 
Defence conducts and also details Defence’s contribution to 
an active deterrence posture.

38
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
The Armed Forces, working with the 
rest of government, must think and 
act differently. They will no longer 
be held as a force of last resort, but 
become more present and active 
around the world.
 
Defence in a competitive age, 2021 
”
“

39
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
3
Utility of the military instrument
Chapter 3
Utility of the military 
instrument
3.1. Defence and the military instrument of national power play a unique 
role in protecting and promoting the three fundamental national interests: 
sovereignty, security and prosperity. Defence’s fundamental purpose is 
to protect the people of the UK, prevent conflict and be ready to fight our 
enemies. To meet national ambition and to protect the UK, its citizens, its 
interests and its allies, our Armed Forces must be ready and able to fight; 
it is their core competence. The willingness to commit credible warfighting 
capabilities is an essential part of our ability to compete and operate more 
effectively and therefore our ability to deter, including whilst engaged in an 
armed conflict.
3.2. Defence and partners across government need to continually adjust the 
way we think about applying the military instrument to match circumstances, 
recognising that the military instrument is just one of the instruments that 
would need to be applied. Long-held beliefs, assumptions and attitudes (that 
give meaning to shared experiences and shape corporate behaviour) must 
evolve rapidly if our strategic culture is to keep pace with the security context 
and our ambition. 
Section 1 – Smart power, operational 
domains and levels of operations
3.3. As described in Chapter 2, multi-domain integration will enhance 
the utility of the military instrument through being able to sense and then 
orchestrate combinations of activities across the five operational domains – 
maritime, land, air, space, and cyber and electromagnetic – in concert with 
our allies and partners, and across government using a combination of hard 
and soft power, which is known as smart power. In addition to this horizontal 
integration (activity across operational domains), further advantage will be 
realised by vertical integration (activities within the same domain) through the 
strategic, operational and tactical levels of operations.

40
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
Smart power
3.4. States and organisations apply power across the instruments to achieve 
policy goals through a blend of ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ power. These are described 
below. The skill of smart power lies in knowing when to use differing levels of 
each as necessary.
a. Hard power. Hard power employs military capability and economic 
strength (both sanctions and incentives) to achieve the desired 
behaviours of states, groups or individuals, or to directly change 
the course of events. Those using hard power often seek to coerce 
opponents to adopt a course of action that they would not otherwise 
choose themselves. The military and economic instruments are 
important sources of hard power, supported by the diplomatic and 
information instruments. They also serve as deterrents. The difference 
between deterrence and coercion is important. Both are aspects of hard 
power, but deterrence aims to dissuade a course of action whilst one of 
the aims of coercion is to encourage a course of action. Deterrence is 
described in greater detail at Section 3.
b. Soft power. Soft power is the ability to persuade or encourage 
others to adopt an alternative approach primarily through cultural and 
ideological means or by encouraging emulation. Soft power is generally 
slower and more difficult to employ in a targeted way. Much soft power 
lies outside a democratic government’s control, presenting a challenge 
to its generation. Therefore, applying soft power demands: investment 
over time; clear, consistent communication strategies and measures 
of effectiveness; and a developed understanding of the intended 
audience and their societal codes, beliefs and cultures. Diplomatic and 
informational capabilities underpin the effectiveness of soft power. Soft 
power is important to the UK. The UK’s soft power, the size and depth 
of its global connections and the trust we enjoy, has a direct impact 
on our prosperity and security. The military is generally considered the 
quintessential instrument of hard power, but it has important soft power 
uses, for instance in training assistance, professional military education, 
carrying out or enabling humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, and 
promoting Global Britain.

41
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
3
Utility of the military instrument
Operational domains
3.5. Military activity occurs within the five operational domains. Operational 
domains provide a framework for organising the military instrument and 
represent spheres of military activity within the engagement space. The 
term ‘operational’ does not refer to the operational level of warfare, it reflects 
operations and activity within the engagement space. 
a. Maritime domain. The maritime domain comprises capabilities 
and their activities primarily related to operating below, on and above 
the surface of the oceans, seas, bays, estuaries, islands, coastal areas 
and at the high-water mark, overlapping with the land domain in the 
landward segment of the littorals.23
b. Land domain. The land domain comprises capabilities and activities 
primarily related to operating on the Earth’s land mass, ending at the 
high-water mark and overlapping with the maritime domain in the 
landward segment of the littorals.24
c. Air domain. The air domain comprises capabilities and activities 
primarily related to operating in the airspace that begins at the Earth’s 
23 See Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-10, UK Maritime Power for further detail.
24 See JDP 0-20, UK Land Power for further detail
The military is generally considered the quintessential instrument of  
hard power, but it has important soft power uses

42
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
surface, extending to the altitude where atmospheric effects on airborne 
objects become negligible.25
d. Space domain. The space domain comprises activities and 
capabilities primarily related to operating in space, where atmospheric 
effects on airborne objects become negligible but its capabilities are 
enabled by assets on Earth. Therefore, the space domain includes the 
satellites in orbit and beyond, supporting ground infrastructure and the 
information layer connecting ground and space.26
e. Cyber and electromagnetic domain. The cyber and 
electromagnetic domain comprises capabilities and activities primarily 
related to operating within the interdependent networks of information 
technology infrastructures and resident data. This includes the 
Internet, telecommunications networks, computer systems, embedded 
processors, controllers and the electromagnetic waves with frequencies 
that constitute the electromagnetic spectrum.27
3.6. Although information is not a domain, information activities are 
operational domain actions whose primary focus is to create a cognitive effect. 
The integration of information operations staff in planning processes ensure 
that the full range of domain and information activities required to achieve a 
successful outcome are harnessed.28  
3.7. Successful integration of actions, within and across domains, enables 
the commander to gain and maintain the initiative by enhancing pre-emption, 
surprise, simultaneity, tempo and exploitation. This generates greater freedom 
of manoeuvre in the engagement space to create physical, virtual and 
cognitive effects within their operations area.
Levels of operations
3.8. The military instrument is applied across three levels of operations: 
strategic, operational and tactical. This delineation helps clarify the 
relationships and actions required to link national aims, strategic objectives, 
25 See JDP 0-30, UK Air Power for further detail.
26 See JDP 0-40, UK Space Power for further detail.
27 See JDP 0-50, UK Defence Cyber and Electromagnetic Doctrine  for further detail. The 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization refers to cyberspace as the domain and not cyber and 
electromagnetic.
28 See Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.10, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations  
for further detail.

43
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
3
Utility of the military instrument
military campaigns and major operations, and tactical operations and actions. 
In theory, each level has its own purpose, time horizons, command and control 
structures, and capability ownership. In practice, the difference between these 
blurs and the need for greater integration through the levels of operations is 
increasing.
a. Strategic. Defence works to integrate military capability and activity 
across government and with allies and partners. Military strategies are 
created and managed at the strategic level. Strategic objectives are 
generally long-term and evolve over time, unless a significant change 
in the operating environment requires more dynamic reassessment. 
Political necessity may, at times, drive the strategic level to direct 
discrete tactical activities, bypassing the operational level.
b. Operational. The operational level is the level at which major 
operations are planned and effects are created to achieve strategic 
objectives. The operational level can modulate the intensity of a 
campaign by increasing or decreasing the number, types, location or 
limitations of tactical operations to create the desired strategic effect. 
Capabilities that are required by multiple tactical commands are often 
controlled at the operational level to enable them to be allocated when 
required. In a national context, the operational level is the responsibility 
of the joint commander, with a commander joint task force operating 
in theatre under their command, spanning the tactical and operational 
levels. In a multinational setting, the UK contingent commander will be 
responsible for integrating the national contribution into the overall force, 
again under the command of the joint commander.
c. Tactical. At the tactical level, operations are planned and executed, 
within the context of the narrative, to achieve defined objectives. 
Increasingly, tactical commands are multi-domain by nature. Tactical 
actions typically manifest themselves as individual operations in which 
the tactical commander must increasingly integrate activity. 
3.9. A component commander will normally be designated and is responsible 
for planning and conducting operations within a specific operational domain to 
organise a joint commander’s span of command.29 Components are groupings 
of force elements normally organised by domain or function, but the force will 
be organised to reflect each specific operational requirement. The maritime, 
29 See AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations . Componency is 
explained further in AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations .

44
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
land, air, special operations, and the Joint Force Logistics Component are the 
normal UK component commands. Space, now a standalone command, will 
be a separate component. Recent operations have seen a mission assurance 
component commander appointed who has delivered defensive cyber 
operations as part of their wider mission assurance remit (offensive cyber 
operations being delivered separately). Concurrently, cyber operations staff are 
integrated into the appropriate headquarters to coordinate and integrate activity.
Section 2 – Categorising operations
3.10. Integrated Operating Concept. In common with multi-domain 
integration, the Integrated Operating Concept (IOpC) is a concept. It creates 
a framework of understanding, the intent of which is to provide Defence with 
clarity when thinking about strategic competition. The IOpC considers activities 
across four functions: protect, engage, constrain and warfight. The functions 
must not be thought of as a linear progression. Their successful application 
requires a mindset that thinks in several dimensions so that escalation and 
de-escalation is dynamically managed up and down the levels of operations 
and across operational domains. Parallel activities across the functions can be 
expected to take place simultaneously. An activity may contribute to more than 
one function. The magnitude of each function must be dynamically adjusted to 
compete with, deter and, if necessary, defeat our adversaries.
3.11. Operation types. Operations are categorised into types by the essential 
characteristics that differentiate them from one another. Defence Strategy 2022 
lists five types of operation to be undertaken by Defence: homeland, global 
foundation, persistent engagement, crisis response and warfighting. Examples 
of how the types of operations relate to the IOpC functions are given below.
Protect
3.12. The protect function is the enduring foundation, it is fundamental 
to deterrence. Its purpose is to prevent modern threats exploiting our 
vulnerabilities. The priority will always be to defend the UK, our Overseas 
Territories, Crown Dependencies and sovereign rights, and our North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) Allies. As the nature, reach and persistence of the 
threats that adversaries can bring to bear against the home base have radically 
evolved, our contribution to domestic security and resilience is increasing 
in scale and importance.30 The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the 
essential contribution of an adaptable and skilled Defence workforce to other 
30 For further detail see JDP 02, UK Operations: the Defence Contribution to Resilience .

45
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
3
Utility of the military instrument
government departments during a period of national and global crisis. It has 
also highlighted that natural hazards and other risks can cause as much 
disruption to the UK’s core interests as security threats.
3.13. Protect activity includes hardening Defence’s critical infrastructure 
and contributing to the resilience of critical national infrastructure. Defence 
therefore needs to be able to respond rapidly to a wide range of national and 
overseas events and crises from environmental hazards through to malicious 
attacks by terrorists or states, including chemical, biological, radiological and 
nuclear incidents. Indeed, extreme threats to the UK and our allies have not 
gone away. Meeting these challenges requires us to mitigate Defence’s own 
vulnerabilities and to recognise that the critical role of the protect function is 
not just to enable freedom of action for Defence but to contribute to protecting 
our way of life – as such, it is non-discretionary.
3.14. The protect function is delivered by Defence Strategy 2022’s homeland 
operations. Examples include: military aid to the civil authorities to assist 
partners across government responding to significant events; counterterrorism 
and intelligence operations in support of partners across government; and 
military deterrence activity over the UK’s sovereign territory to counter maritime, 
land, air, and space and cyber incursions. The protect function encompasses 
the continuous at sea deterrent and NATO’s vigilance activity also contributes 
to it (for example, the Royal Air Force’s (RAF) Quick Reaction Alert).
The protect function spans all operational domains

46
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
Engage
3.15. The engage function is founded on a forward deployed posture to 
assure influence, to deter and to reassure. Activities that establish and maintain 
the human networks, enhanced through digital connectivity, are the foundation 
on which posture is established and are at the heart of the engage function. 
Our global military footprint is an expression of our international and alliance 
resolve and can be modulated and enhanced through a blend of Defence 
diplomacy, Defence attachés, strategic hubs, permanently forward-based 
forces and stockpiles, permanent joint operating bases, episodic training and 
exercises, and mobile command and control nodes. Building partner capacity 
through ‘train, advise and assist’ operations strengthens coalitions, enhances 
regional security and provides an alternative to the offers of our rivals, denying 
them influence whilst securing it for ourselves.31 The engage function also 
involves developing appropriate channels of communication with rivals to build 
understanding, avoid miscalculation and underscore credibility. All engage 
activities should contribute to insight and understanding.
3.16. The engage function is enduring and allows Defence to pursue UK 
foreign policy objectives and shape conditions for stability and is, therefore, 
a critical component of how the force operates. It requires a long-term 
campaigning mindset focused on posture and the use of the force as part 
of the overall campaign design; therefore, securing the political and policy 
permissions to create desired effects is vital. Persistent engagement prioritised 
in places where we can achieve impact against prominent challenges 
increases our ability to pre-empt and manage crises before they escalate. 
This minimises the opportunities for state and non-state actors to undermine 
international stability.
3.17. Our effectiveness can be enhanced by driving the tempo of strategic 
activity in a sustained, dynamic, calibrated approach that is integrated with 
other government departments and the international engagement networks of 
our allies. Persistent engagement enables real time accurate understanding to 
inform the development of options, decision-making and influence, and helps 
us to achieve strategic advantage. Overall, enhanced presence and greater 
commitment will strengthen our partnerships and create the unity which 
our adversaries fear. It will contribute to trade and strengthened prosperity, 
deter adversaries and reassure our allies. Done well, global engagement can 
promote the UK as a force for good, delivering against national objectives.
31 For further detail see JDP 05, Shaping a Stable World: the Military Contribution .

47
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
3
Utility of the military instrument
3.18. Global foundation and persistent engagement operations primarily 
support the engage function. Examples include: the Royal Navy’s presence in  
the Gulf; the RAF’s contribution to NATO’s enhanced air policing in the Baltic 
(which can provide a protect or a constrain function); capacity building by 
the British Army’s Security Force Assistance Brigade; and cross-government 
promotion of UK trade and industry in conjunction with the Defence attaché 
network and supporting Defence activity such as Royal Navy port visits. 
Disaster relief operations overseas, humanitarian assistance and non-combatant 
evacuation operations can also be associated with this function.
Constrain
3.19. Constrain is the most proactive and assertive function. It may involve the 
use of force, for example, by:
• escalating beyond training, advising and assisting to accompanying 
partners to enable them to act offensively;
• restricting a rival or adversary’s choice of action by deploying armed 
forces or strategic effects to demonstrate reach and responsiveness;
• shaping an adversary’s behaviour through covert and overt activity;
• contesting the cyber and electromagnetic domain to limit an 
adversary’s freedom of action, protect our own networks or enhance 
the impact of our activities in the other operational domains;
All engage activities should contribute to insight and understanding

48
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
• challenging assertions of sovereignty through deployments 
and freedom of navigation operations that aim to constrain ‘fait 
accompli’ strategies; and
• preventing an adversary from achieving escalation dominance.
3.20. The intensity at which constrain activity takes place is not fixed. It 
will be modulated in relation to the nature of the broader relationship that 
the UK has with our rivals at any one time. The constrain function requires 
us to demonstrate the will and capability, lethal and non-lethal, to confront 
threats early. This requires a force that is agile, resilient and ‘front-footed’ in 
mindset and posture. As part of an integrated wider-government approach, 
and alongside allies and partners, we are better able to address conflict and 
instability, and can present adversaries with multiple dilemmas to shape and 
alter their decision calculus. The credibility of constrain activity will at times 
require us to operate with our partners in hostile environments to counter 
and deny state and non-state threats. It must therefore be underpinned by 
the will and capability to reconfigure, surge and apply hard power, within an 
appropriate legal framework, when the threat demands it.
3.21. Where persistent engagement operations are insufficient to pre-empt 
and manage crisis, crisis response operations may take place within the 
constrain function. Examples of such operations include: counter-irregular 
activities (terrorism, insurgency, piracy and criminality); support to embargoes; 
exclusion and no-fly zones; protecting shipping from attack; and larger peace 
support operations. The potential level of intensity and violence encountered 
mean that constrain activity may well involve armed conflict.
Warfight
3.22. Warfighting is a contest between the regular armed forces of states, 
including irregular elements, and can be distinguished from the constrain 
function by the significantly increased risk and financial commitment. 
Warfighting is highly resource-intensive, often involves protracted violence, and 
requires the integration and commitment of all instruments of national power. 
The increasingly blurred interface between conventional and nuclear conflict 
introduces more complex routes for escalation. In its ultimate form, warfighting 
requires the full resources of the state, including mobilising the nation. The 
ability and willingness to commit hard power to fighting wars is a fundamental 
foundation of our influence and deterrence. 

49
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
3
Utility of the military instrument
© BigNazik / Shutterstock.com
Section 3 – The Defence contribution to 
deterrence
3.23. Deterrence is defined as: the convincing of a potential aggressor that 
the consequences of coercion or armed conflict would outweigh the potential 
gains. This requires the maintenance of a credible military capability and 
strategy with the clear political will to act.32
3.24. A credible capability to deter remains central to our military purpose 
and contributes to a whole-of-government response alongside NATO and  
like-minded partners. In the NATO 2022 Strategic Concept NATO has 
reaffirmed its resolve in the face of the Russian Federation’s actions and 
committed to strengthening the deterrence and defence posture to deny 
opportunities for aggression. As with war, the nature of deterrence is constant, 
but its character is changeable, reflecting several factors, such as politics, 
economics, technology and culture. In the contemporary environment this is 
demonstrated by the tension between the West and assertive authoritarian 
states, principally the Russian Federation, but also the People’s Republic of 
China and Iran. 
32 NATOTerm.
The UK must determine what adversary activities can and must be deterred
Deterrence exists in the mind of an adversary.
 
Jim Mattis, former United States Secretary of Defense, 2018
“

50
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
3.25. Our deterrence must remain active and focused. It is impossible to 
deter all threats and so the UK must determine what adversary activities can 
and must be deterred, and which are better tackled through resilience or other 
forms of activity. In an era of persistent competition our deterrence posture 
needs to be actively managed and modulated. 
3.26. Comprehension. An active deterrence posture requires us to be 
better at comprehension. Comprehension is about more than conducting 
audience analysis with international partners to understand our adversaries’ 
intent, the drivers of their behaviour, their thresholds and points of influence. 
It also requires an understanding of our own strengths, weaknesses, 
limitations and essential red lines, nationally and in concert with others. The 
sum of this analysis is insight. Comprehension affords a better prospect 
of conducting escalation management by prioritising actions and activities 
across government, acknowledging areas where greater risk can be tolerated. 
Continual assessments that evaluate the effectiveness of ongoing activities 
on our target audiences allow Defence to be strategically predictable but 
operationally unpredictable. Comprehension is therefore fundamental to 
communicating an active deterrence posture.
3.27 . Capability. As part of a whole-of-government approach, and in 
conjunction with partners and allies, the UK must demonstrate credible 
capability to deny benefits and impose costs on adversaries with malign intent. 
In an increasingly complex and uncertain environment, Defence continually 
develops and updates responsive multi-domain options informing political 
choice to proactively shape the security environment or mitigate the effect of a 
failure to deter.
a. Denial of benefits. Deterrence by denial of benefits aims to 
convince adversaries that they will not realise their desired benefit 
through malign activity.
b. Imposition of costs. This aims to ensure that the cost to our 
adversaries of conducting activities will outweigh any potential benefit 
they seek. Adversaries will seek to identify and defend their vulnerable 
points of influence. Defence should, therefore, identify and formulate 
indirect ways of affecting these points of influence, while denying the 
adversary the ability to bring their strengths to bear.

51
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
3
Utility of the military instrument
3.28. Credibility. Credibility is underpinned by political will and the 
capability to act if threatened. Audiences constantly analyse our attitudes and 
behaviours; patterns of behaviour over time contribute to their perceptions of 
our credibility. Predictable behaviour can add to credibility. In some cases, it is 
necessary to take risk to communicate the strength of UK commitment.
3.29. Communication. All levels of command should share a common 
narrative that continuously reinforces the strategy. Unclear outcomes, 
objectives, actions, words or apparent discrepancies and contradictions may 
signal the policy position is not firm. Vague or unclear narratives also increase 
the likelihood of confusion, misinterpretation and potentially unintentional 
escalation. Communications can have a deterrent effect on non-state actors, 
for instance, countering irregular activity reinforces a narrative of national 
resolve.
Escalation management
3.30. Deterrence is a continuous escalation management activity that cuts 
across our strategies, actions and words. It involves enhancing our ability 
to manage and de-escalate a crisis. An important and complicating feature 
of deterrence is the blurring between conventional strategic and nuclear 
capabilities. Some states have integrated nuclear weapons into their military 
strategies alongside conventional capabilities. In parallel, the increase in 
global competition and proliferation of disruptive technologies expands the 
range of options to create strategic effect. Some non-nuclear capabilities 
have the potential to threaten strategic stability through miscalculation and 
rapid escalation, or by offering incentives to move first and fast in a high-end 
conventional fight. Both elements introduce more complex routes for escalation 
to armed conflict.
3.31. In response, we must improve our ability to think in several dimensions 
so that escalation and de-escalation can be dynamically managed up and 
down multiple ladders and across operational domains in which there will be 
asymmetries of capabilities and interests. This will require us to be better able 
to detect, comprehend, attribute and act in response to aggression across 
the full range of possible threats. Exercising whole-of-government responses 
alongside NATO and like-minded partners will be a vital part of improving 
understanding and addressing the challenges of managing conflict escalation.

52
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
3
Utility of the military instrument
Key points
• Defence’s fundamental purpose is to protect the people of the UK, 
prevent conflict and be ready to fight our enemies.
• The utility of the military instrument is to both operate and warfight, 
gaining advantage through offering a wide breadth of political choice and 
credible military options that can be threatened or used to break the will 
of our adversaries.
• States and organisations apply power to achieve policy goals using smart 
power: a blend of ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ power. 
• Operational domains provide a framework for organising the military 
instrument and represent spheres of military activity within the 
engagement space. Integration is necessary across operational domains 
in which there will be asymmetries of capabilities and interests.
• The military instrument is applied across three levels of operations: 
strategic, operational and tactical.
• The IOpC describes military activity through the protect, engage, 
constrain and warfight functions.
• Defence Strategy 2022 lists five types of operation to be undertaken by 
Defence: homeland, global foundation, persistent engagement, crisis 
response and warfighting. 
• A credible capability to deter remains central to our military purpose. The 
UK requires an active deterrence posture against a broad array of threats.
• We must improve our ability to think in several dimensions so that 
escalation and de-escalation can be dynamically managed up and down 
multiple ladders and across instruments of power, operational domains 
and levels of operations.

53
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Lexicon
Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
AJP  Allied joint publication
COED  Concise Oxford English Dictionary
DCDC  Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
IOpC  Integrated Operating Concept
JDP  joint doctrine publication
MDI  multi-domain integration 
MOD  Ministry of Defence
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization
RAF  Royal Air Force 
RUSI  Royal United Services Institute
SACEUR Supreme Allied Commander Europe
UK  United Kingdom 
UKDD  UK Defence Doctrine
 

54
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
Lexicon
Section 2 – Terms and definitions
This section lists the definitions used in the publication along with some 
additional terms that may be useful to the reader.
actor 
An individual, group or entity whose actions are affecting the attainment of the 
end state. (NATOTerm)
adversary 
An individual, group or entity whose intentions or interests are opposed to 
those of friendly parties and against which legal coercive political, military or 
civilian actions may be envisaged and conducted. (NATOTerm)
audience 
An individual, group or entity whose interpretation of events and subsequent 
behaviour may affect the attainment of the end state. 
Note: The audience may consist of publics, stakeholders and actors. 
(NATOTerm)
audience analysis 
The understanding and segmentation of audiences in support of the 
achievement of objectives. (NATOTerm)
campaign 
A set of military operations planned and conducted to achieve a strategic 
objective. (NATOTerm)
concept 
An agreed notion or idea, normally set out in a document, that provides 
guidance for different working domains and which may lead to the 
development of a policy. (NATOTerm)
deterrence 
The convincing of a potential aggressor that the consequences of coercion 
or armed conflict would outweigh the potential gains. This requires the 
maintenance of a credible military capability and strategy with the clear political 
will to act. (NATOTerm)

55
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition)
Lexicon
doctrine 
Fundamental principles by which military forces guide their actions in 
support of objectives. It is authoritative but requires judgement in application. 
(NATOTerm)
enemy 
An individual or group, entity or state actors whose actions are hostile and 
against which the legal use of armed force is authorized. (NATOTerm)
fighting power 
The ability of the armed forces to shape, contest, and fight. 
Note: It represents three interrelated components: the moral, conceptual and 
physical. (NATOTerm)
narrative 
A spoken or written account of events and information arranged in a logical 
sequence to influence the behaviour of a target audience. (NATOTerm)
operation 
A sequence of coordinated actions with a defined purpose. (NATOTerm)
operational art 
The employment of forces to attain strategic and/or operational objectives 
through the design, organization, integration and conduct of strategies, 
campaigns, major operations and battles. (NATOTerm)
operational domain 
A specified sphere of capabilities and activities that can be applied within an 
engagement space. (NATOTerm)
public 
An individual, group or entity who are aware of activities that may affect the 
attainment of the end state. (NATOTerm)
readiness 
The period measured from an initiation order to the moment when the 
headquarters or unit is ready to perform its task from its peacetime location 
(permanent of forward deployed) or ready for deployment. (JDP 0-01.1)

56
JDP 0-01 (6th Edition) 
Lexicon
stakeholder 
An individual, group or entity who can affect or is affected by the attainment of 
the end state. (NATOTerm)
sustainability 
The ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of combat power for the 
duration required to achieve its objectives. (NATOTerm)
target 
An area, infrastructure, object, audience or organization against which 
activities can be directed to create desired effects. (NATOTerm)
target audience analysis 
The focused examination of targeted audiences to create desired effects. 
(NATOTerm)
war 
A state of armed conflict between different countries or different groups within 
a country. (COED)

[Page 67: No extractable text]

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2022Crown copyright 2022
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc


