[Page 1: No extractable text]

i
JDP 01
Joint Doctrine Publication 01
UK Joint Operations Doctrine
Joint Doctrine Publication 01 (JDP 01), dated November 2014, 
is promulgated 
as directed by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Concepts and Doctrine
Conditions of release
1.  This information is Crown copyright.  The Ministry of Defence (MOD) exclusively 
owns the intellectual property rights for this publication.  You are not to forward, 
reprint, copy, distribute, reproduce, store in a retrieval system, or transmit its 
information outside the MOD without VCDS’ permission.
2.  This information may be subject to privately owned rights.
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   1 03/12/2014   12:48:18

ii
JDP 01
Authorisation
 
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for publishing 
strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine.  If you wish to quote our publications 
as reference material in other work, you should confirm with our editors whether the 
particular publication and amendment state remains authoritative.  We welcome your 
comments on factual accuracy or amendment proposals.  Please send them to:
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Ministry of Defence Shrivenham 
SWINDON, 
Wiltshire, 
SN6 8RF 
Telephone:                        01793 314216/7          F acsimile number:      01793 314232
Military network:            96161 4216/4217          M ilitary Network:        96161 4232
E-mail: DCDC-DocEds@mod.uk 
All images, or otherwise stated are: © crown copyright/MOD 2014. 
Distribution
 
Distributing Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01 is managed by the Forms and 
Publications Section, LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre, C16 Site, Ploughley 
Road, Arncott, Bicester, OX25 1LP .  All of our other publications, including a regularly 
updated DCDC Publications Disk, can also be demanded from the LCSLS Operations 
Centre. 
LCSLS Help Desk:    0 1869 256197
Military Network: 9 4240 2197
Our publications (including drafts) are available to view and download on the 
Defence Intranet (RLI) at: http://defenceintranet.diif.r.mil.uk/Organisations/Orgs/JFC/
Organisations/Orgs/DCDC  
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   2 03/12/2014   12:48:18

iii
JDP 01
Abstract
Purpose
1. The operational level of warfare provides the link between the strategic and 
tactical levels.  This is the level at which Joint Force Commanders (JFC)1 and their staff 
plan, conduct and sustain military operations, normally in a wider multi-agency and 
multinational context.  Interoperability is a critical element of mission success and is 
enhanced by clear direction and orders, supported by doctrine.  
2. Scope.  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine provides:
•	 an introduction to NATO operational-level doctrine; and 
•	 the national context to ensure its utility for a UK JFC and their staff. 
3. JDP 01 will not duplicate information contained within Allied joint operational-
level doctrine; instead it will reference the appropriate NATO publication.  It also 
fills the gap in those planning and operations doctrine areas which are not fully 
addressed in existing NATO publications, or where we have a unique and relevant 
doctrinal or philosophical approach which must be retained.  It will also provide the 
strategic context for national and coalition operations explaining:
•	 how our national military instrument works alongside other levers of national 
power in pursuit of policy objectives;
•	 our structures and processes for formulating strategy and for crisis 
management; and
•	 any differences between UK and NATO processes.
Context
4. The high-level direction ‘to adopt NATO doctrine wherever we can and ensure 
compatibility wherever we cannot’ 2 prompted a DCDC review of UK national and 
Alliance planning and operations doctrine.  This review concluded that there are 
few fundamental differences in doctrinal approach.  Therefore, UK Defence will use 
NATO’s operations planning and execution doctrine for both national and Alliance 
operations, augmenting it with national text where necessary.
1 J FC: Throughout this publication Joint Force Commander (JFC) is used when referring to the 
operational-level commander of a joint force, regardless of how it has been constructed (for example 
Joint Task Force (JTF), Deployed Joint Task Force (DJTF), or Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF).  JFC is used 
in this way throughout NATO doctrine.  The UK’s Joint Forces Command will not be abbreviated in this 
document.  For operations in the UK, the Standing Joint Commander (SJC) is the JFC.
2 C hief of Defence Staff and Permanent Under Secretary D/CDS/3/1/5  Putting NATO at the Heart of UK 
Defence, dated 13 July 2012.
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   3 03/12/2014   12:48:18

iv
JDP 01
Audience
5. JDP 01 is written to assist a JFC and their staff on operations and in their 
education and training.  Tactical commanders and headquarters who seek to 
understand the processes they are supporting will also find it useful.  It will also help 
other UK government departments and non-UK partners to understand our approach 
to operations. 
Structure
6. JDP 01 is divided into three chapters.
a. Chapter 1 – National processes describes our strategic structures and 
mechanisms for decision-making and crisis management.  
b. Chapter 2 – Operational-level planning describes our crisis management 
procedures and introduces Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine 
for Operational-Level Planning and Allied Command Operations Comprehensive 
Operations Planning Directive (COPD).  
c. Chapter 3 – Commanding the force discusses command considerations in 
a range of contexts, addresses missions and identifies desirable characteristics in 
commanders. 
Linkages
7. Above the operational level (where NATO joint doctrine is comprehensive), using 
the military instrument of power is addressed in the other national publications in the 
UK’s doctrine architecture.  These are: 
•	  JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine; 
•	  JDP 02, UK Resilience; and
•	  JDP 04, Understanding.
Along with JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine, these publications provide a JFC 
and their staff with a coherent portfolio of national doctrine, and the context for the 
supporting NATO and national doctrine.
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   4 03/12/2014   12:48:19

v
JDP 01
8. JDP 01, Campaigning, and JDP 5-00, Campaign Planning have now been 
withdrawn.  For operational-level doctrine and procedures for joint operations, you 
should refer to: 
•	 AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine; 
•	 AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-Level Planning; and the
•	 Allied Command Operations (ACO) Comprehensive Operations Planning 
Directive. 
We will retain JDP 3-00, Campaign Execution until AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the 
Conduct of Operations has been reviewed and its next edition published.
9. JDP 01, and the other national keystone doctrine publications, should also be 
read with the:
•	  National Security Strategy; 3
•	  Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR); 4
•	  International Defence Engagement Strategy; 5
•	  Building Stability Overseas Strategy; 6
•	  New Operating Model: How Defence Works; 7
•	  DCDC’s Strategic Trends Programme;8 and
•	  Defence Joint Operating Concept.9 
3 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/61936/national-
security-strategy.pdf
4  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/62482/strategic-
defence-security-review.pdf
5 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/73171/defence_
engagement_strategy.pdf
6  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/27370/bsos_
july2011.pdf
7 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/360143/20140930_24153_How_Defence_Works.pdf 
8 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/348164/20140821_
DCDC_GST_5_Web_Secured.pdf
9 A vailable on the Defence Intranet.
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   5 03/12/2014   12:48:19

vi
JDP 01
We all rely on each other.  We all are 
integrated at the right level.  We deeply 
admire the tribes and the backgrounds, 
the ethos we come from, and that can 
be as competitive as you need it to be, 
in an appropriate setting.  But we are 
joint by definition. 
 
 
Air Chief Marshal Sir Stuart Peach KBE CBE ADC 
Vice Chief of the Defence Staff 
”
“
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   6 03/12/2014   12:48:19

vii
JDP 01
Contents 
Abstract  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  iv
Chapter 1 – National processes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 
Chapter 2 – Operational-level planning  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 37 
Chapter 3 – Commanding the force  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  99 
 
 
 
 
 
”
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   7 03/12/2014   12:48:19

20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   8 03/12/2014   12:48:19

National processes
This chapter describes the UK’s strategic structures 
and mechanisms for Defence decision-making and 
adds the coalition context.  It introduces planning 
and decision-making – the elements that contribute 
to operations design.  It introduces Allied Joint 
Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine and  
AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-Level 
Planning.
Chapter 1
JDP 01
1
1
Section 1 – Defence governance   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
Section 2 – Overview of military planning and  
decision-making  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
Annex 1A – Representative Chief of Defence Staff’s  
Planning Directive  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
Annex 1B – Representative Chief of Defence Staff’s 
Operation’s Directive. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   1 03/12/2014   12:48:19

2
JDP 012
1
Section 1 – Defence governanceWar is the continuation of policy by 
other means. 
 
Carl von Clausewitz 
However beautiful the strategy,  
you should occasionally look at  
the results.
 
Winston Churchill
”
“
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   2 03/12/2014   12:48:19

3
JDP 013
1
Chapter 1 – National 
processes
Section 1 – Defence governance
Overview
1.1. Understanding how the operational level of warfare provides the interface 
between the tactical and strategic levels of warfare is vital.1  Strategically, Defence 
is integral to our national security and directly supports our government’s policy 
objectives.  The decision to commit our Armed Forces to operations rests with the 
Prime Minister, informed by the Cabinet and National Security Council, with advice 
from Secretary of State for Defence and Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS).2  Parliament 
is normally consulted before military action, but such consultation may not always 
be possible.   Decisions on Parliamentary handling will continue to be made at the 
discretion of the Prime Minister on a case-by-case basis.  Parliamentary consultation 
should be factored into planning at an early stage.
1.2. Democratic control and political direction of our Armed Forces are exercised by 
Ministers, either individually or in committee.  Desired outcomes are articulated as 
government policy, expressed as government intent in the form of a national strategic 
aim and translated into actionable objectives for across-government strategic 
planning.  Ministers will decide on the approach for each situation, taking advice from 
a variety of across-government committees and the National Security Council. 
1.3. As a military-strategic headquarters, the MOD’s Head Office plays an active part 
in supporting the National Security Council and developing the National Security 
Strategy and the associated Strategic Defence and Security Review outcomes.  The 
Head Office’s role in directing operations and other military tasks3 is described in The 
New Operating Model – How Defence Works.4
1 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01), UK Defence Doctrine  describes the levels of warfare.
2  The Secretary of State for Defence is a member of the Cabinet and National Security Council and 
chairs the Defence Council.  As the government’s military adviser, CDS provides military advice to the 
Cabinet and National Security Council as required.
3  The Head Office does not command forces directly or involve itself in the day-to-day running of 
operations.  However, it retains responsibility for conducting strategic-level operations with global impact 
(including counter proliferation, nuclear deterrence, strategic influence and strategic targeting).
4  The New Operating Model – How Defence Works , version 4.0, dated April 2014, is available through the 
Defence Intranet and the Internet. 
Democratic 
control and 
political 
direction of 
our Armed 
Forces are 
exercised by 
Ministers, either 
individually or 
in committee.
”
“
”
”
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   3 03/12/2014   12:48:20

4
JDP 014
1
National Security Council
1.4. The National Security Council is the main forum for collective discussion of 
the government’s national security objectives and how best to deliver them.  It 
integrates, at the highest level, the work of the departments of state and other parts 
of government contributing to national security.  The National Security Council meets 
weekly and is chaired by the Prime Minister.  It brings together all senior Ministers 
with an interest in national security, including the Secretary of State for Defence.  As 
the government’s principal military adviser, CDS attends as required.  The National 
Security Council is supported by National Security Council (Officials).  The latter is 
chaired by the National Security Adviser.
1.5. The Prime Minister and National Security Council, advised by the MOD and 
other government departments, set the strategic priorities for Defence and security.  
They also develop the National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security 
Review.  Together these documents set the government’s national security priorities 
and determine how they will be delivered – including identifying the contribution the 
government may ask Defence to make.  They also provide the strategic direction to 
overseas operations. 
First National Security Council Meeting – the UK’s main forum for collective discussion of the government’s 
national security objectives
© AP images
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   4 03/12/2014   12:48:20

5
JDP 015
1
Figure 1.1 – Developing national strategy
             
             
MOD
DCMO
PJHQ
OGD
FCO DFID
Security services
Allies, IO, NGO
             
                                          
NGO
NSC(OD)
OGD
PJHQ
Non-governmental organisation
National Security Council  
(Overseas and Defence) 
Other government department
Permanent Joint Headquarters
CDS
COBR
DCMO
DFID
FCO
IO
Chief of the Defence Staﬀ
Cabinet Oﬃce Briefing Room
Defence Crisis Management Organisation
Department for International Development
Foreign and Commonwealth Oﬃce
International organisation
National strategyMilitary strategy
 
Cabinet Oﬃce
sub-committees
Prime Minister / 
Cabinet 
Cabinet Oﬃce
NSC
COBR
Ad hoc
strategic
group(s)
Policy
formulation
National
strategic
aim
Political
strategic
analysis Cross-
government
strategy/plan
Strategic levelOperational level
Stabilisation Unit
assessments
Political-
military
estimate
Military
strategic
estimate
CDS’ 
Planning
Directive
National
security
strategy
Legend
MOD Minis try of Defence
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   5 03/12/2014   12:48:20

6
JDP 016
1
Developing national strategy
1.6. The National Security Council determines policy and national strategic 
objectives through a process of political-strategic analysis.  It also provides guidance 
for national planning.  National strategic objectives are based upon the Prime 
Minister’s and Cabinet’s intent and draw on the framework of the National Security 
Strategy.  National policy is then implemented through an integrated across-
government strategy, coordinated through the Cabinet’s Overseas and Defence 
Secretariat (or another across-government body, as appropriate).  Figure 1.1 shows 
how national strategy is developed. 
1.7. Policies dictate ends.  Strategy determines the ways and means of achieving 
the ends.  Together policy and strategy describe what needs to be achieved, how, 
and with what.  A successful national strategy sets out a path, using the instruments 
of national power (diplomatic, economic and military, underpinned by information) 
to maintain political independence, achieve the long-term aims of the nation and/
or protect its vital interests.5  Figure 1.2 shows the key questions the government 
answers when determining a national strategy.
5  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine  introduces the instruments of power in  
Chapter 1 (diplomatic, economic, military and information) but, as a political-military alliance, NATO 
can only coordinate individual members’ economic and civil actions.  The UK identifies diplomatic, 
economic and military instruments of power, all underpinned by information; these are described in more 
detail in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine.  The Allied Command Operations 
Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive  (COPD) describes political, military, economic and civil 
instruments of power.
What and why?
With whom?
Scale and risk?
For how long?
Where and when?
Concurrent with?
Against whom?
Cost?
Sub-committees
Treasury
MOD FCO
DFID
What makes 
things worse?
How good is our 
understanding?
Home
Oﬃce
Attorney
General's
Oﬃce 
Cabinet
Oﬃce
National 
Security Council
How quickly?
Legend
DFID Department for International Development
FCO Foreign and Commonwealth Oﬃce
MOD Ministry of Defence
Figure 1.2 – Determining a national strategy – key questions 
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   6 03/12/2014   12:48:21

7
JDP 017
1
1.8. Answering these questions (which may require involving other nations’ 
governments, international organisations and non-governmental organisations) 
should lead to a single, integrated whole-of-government strategy.6  Such an approach 
coordinates and synchronises the instruments of power.  A lead department, acting 
on behalf of the government, will then:
•	 review, and where necessary, revise the policy outcome;
•	 assess progress and adjust priorities, across government, as necessary; and
•	 ensure the coherent and efficient use of national resources.
The current Defence Strategic Direction identifies the military tasks for Defence and 
directs our priorities.7
1.9. Political-strategic analysis.  Political-strategic analysis comprises the across-
government analysis of a crisis and options for its resolution.8  Political-strategic 
analysis can be led by any nominated department.  However, the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office (FCO), guided by routinely updated political-military estimates, 
usually leads on overseas policy including foreign security.  Political-strategic analysis 
seeks to balance national priorities and resources in often complex and ambiguous 
circumstances.  Any crisis is likely to be dynamic – and it will take time for political 
direction to evolve, especially where the UK intends to operate with other nations or 
multinational institutions (who may develop their responses at a different tempo).  
Consequently, a national response may take time to mature.  Political-strategic 
analysis should provide: 
•	 an understanding of the crisis situation; 
•	 options open to the international community;
•	 options open to our government; 
•	 how the UK may use its assets already in country or deploy additional assets; 
and 
•	 any associated risks.
1.10. Contending with ambiguity.  Evolving direction can significantly increase 
pressure in terms of compressing planning and preparation time.  This demands that 
political and military leaders have to contend with ambiguity at the very time that 
6 T his integrated approach is described in JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine . 
7  Defence Strategic Direction  published 2013 (classified document).
8  Although this publication is concerned with operations overseas, much of it also applies to 
operations in the UK.  The latter, while involving the Defence Crisis Management Organisation (DCMO), 
are not ordinarily directed by Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).  Instead, the Chief of Defence 
Staff has appointed Commander Land Forces as the Standing Joint Commander (UK) with the primary 
responsibility for the Defence contribution to planning and executing joint and other government 
departments-led civil contingency operations.  See JDP 02, Operations in the UK: The Defence Contribution 
to Resilience.
Political-
strategic analysis 
comprises 
the cross-
government 
analysis of 
a crisis and 
options for its 
resolution.
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   7 03/12/2014   12:48:21

8
JDP 018
1
they seek certainty and reassurance.  The fact that uncertainty will be the norm is an 
important insight and doctrine can only mitigate its disruptive impact to a certain 
extent.  Understanding why political decision-making and strategic direction occur as 
they do can go some way to helping leaders deal with uncertainty.
1.11. National decision-making timelines.  Decision-making timelines may be 
intentionally ill-defined.  Political leaders may wish to test reactions (both home 
and abroad) to the inference, announcement or execution of a particular action 
before committing to more comprehensive involvement.  A decision can be made 
to not agree upon a definitive long-term course of action from the outset.  This 
acknowledges the adaptive nature of crises, with intervention from any quarter 
inevitably altering the dynamics between actors and altering the relevance and/
or viability of the objectives sought.  Moreover, incremental decision-making may 
enable political leaders to manage risks with greater sophistication, making only 
those commitments that are necessary.
1.12. Cabinet Office Briefing Rooms. 9  Where a crisis affects multiple government 
departments, a collective response will be led by a nominated department (lead 
government department).  Collective decision-making within central government 
is delivered through the Cabinet committee system; decision-making during 
emergencies follows the same pattern.  Due to the unpredictable nature of crises, 
the government maintains dedicated crisis management facilities (Cabinet Office 
Briefing Rooms) which are only activated in the event of a major national emergency.  
The Prime Minister, Home Secretary or nominated senior Minister will chair key 
meetings involving Ministers and officials from relevant departments.  Key external 
stakeholders may be invited to attend depending on the emergency.  Meetings 
will cover all the strategic aspects of the response and recovery effort.  Officials will 
identify options and provide advice to Ministers.
9  See HM Government Emergency Response and Recovery.  Non statutory guidance accompanying 
the Civil Contingencies Act 200, Chapter 13.4.  Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/253488/Emergency_Response_and_Recovery_5th_edition_
October_2013.pdf
Uncertainty 
will be the 
norm...
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   8 03/12/2014   12:48:21

9
JDP 019
1
1.13. Cabinet Office decision-making.  Meetings within the Cabinet Office Briefing 
Rooms can be at a ministerial or official level and may be supported by:
•	 a situation cell which is responsible for ensuring that there is a single, 
immediate, authoritative overview of the current situation;
•	 communication and/or operations cells; 
•	 an intelligence cell staffed by the intelligence agencies, Joint Terrorism 
Analysis Centre,10 Defence Intelligence Staff and others as necessary;
•	 an impact management group or a recovery group; and
•	 the Joint Intelligence Committee.11
The coalition context
1.14. Multinationality is likely to be an enduring theme.  The UK can commit military 
forces on alliance or coalition12 operations as the framework or lead nation, or as a 
contributing nation.  Multinational operations may be: 
•	 under NATO;
•	 UN-sponsored;
•	 NATO-based coalitions, which may include non-NATO partners (for example 
Operation ALLIED FORCE, Kosovo, 1999) or Operation ELLAMY/UNIFIED 
PROTECTOR, Libya, 2011);
•	 operations involving both the UN and NATO (Bosnia, 1995);
•	 EU operations (Bosnia from 2004, Darfur from 2006); or
•	 informal coalitions, such as the cooperation in Kosovo in 1999 between NATO 
forces and the Kosovo Liberation Army, or in Afghanistan in 2002-03 between 
US forces and the Northern Alliance.
1.15. NATO’s operations doctrine.  The NATO nations’ agreed framework for 
operations planning within, and by, the Alliance is contained in Military Committee 
document 133/4.13  The principles underpinning Alliance decision-making are 
addressed in NATO doctrine.  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine 
considers the essential principles of Alliance doctrine at both the strategic and 
operational levels.  It introduces the NATO operations planning system, the doctrine 
for which is covered in AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-Level Planning.     
10  The Joint Terrorism Analysis Cell is the UK’s centre for analysing and assessing international terrorism 
at home and overseas.  It sets threat levels and issues threat warnings, as well as producing more in-depth 
reports on trends, networks and capabilities.
11  The Joint Intelligence Committee is an across-government committee, which provides ministers 
and senior officials with coordinated inter-departmental intelligence assessments.  It sets national 
requirements and priorities for intelligence.
12  Alliance: a union or association formed for mutual benefit (Concise Oxford English Dictionary).  
Coalition: an ad-hoc arrangement between two or more nations for common action  (JDP 0-01.1, UK 
Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database).
13  Military Committee document MC 133/4 – NATO’s Operations Planning , dated 07 January 2011.
Multinationality 
is an enduring 
theme.
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   9 03/12/2014   12:48:21

10
JDP 0110
1
AJP-01 and AJP-5, along with AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations, 
are ratified for UK use.  AJP-5 is complemented by the Allied Command Operations 
Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive (COPD).  This document articulates the 
NATO strategic and operational-level planning processes.  It supports the NATO crisis 
management process and should be used by operations planners.  This publication 
should complement, not substitute, this NATO higher level doctrinal and procedural 
guidance.  
1.16. Multinational decision-making.  Decision-making between nations involved 
in a multinational operation will be more complicated than in a purely national 
context.  Consensus-building can be both complex and time-consuming.  While the 
logic of establishing shared understanding and common goals across coalitions may 
be sound, the reality is complicated by political, doctrinal, interoperability and legal 
considerations.
1.17. Motives.  The reasons why nations, groups and individuals choose to engage in 
a coalition, or to adopt a particular stance, will reflect a combination of factors.  These 
include commitment to collective responsibility, self-interest, fear, self-preservation, 
shared values and beliefs, efficiency, and humanitarian concern.  National troop 
contributions are often determined by the anticipated political benefits that such 
commitment brings.  Those involved will have differing motivations and perceptions 
of the situation.  These differences may cause ambiguity, mistrust and delay.  
When we intend to act with other nations the outcome sought should be agreed between nations
© UN Photo/Paulo Filgueiras
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   10 03/12/2014   12:48:22

11
JDP 0111
1
1.18. Unity of purpose.  When we intend to act with other nations the outcome 
sought should be agreed between nations (accepting the time and complexity 
involved and (potentially) the reduced clarity of the outcome).  At the very least, 
national perspectives should be harmonised to unify individual national efforts.  
While negotiation and consensus-building may need to precede agreement, 
some form of broadly-agreed desired outcome remains an essential start point for 
further planning.  Formal direction must follow, delivered through national chains 
of command.  In the interim, military preparations and some nations’ preliminary 
operations may already have started.  Outside a formal alliance, achieving unity of 
command on a multinational operation may be politically challenging, but should be 
the goal.  Where unity of command is unachievable, a multinational operation should 
strive for harmonisation of effort.14
1.19. Benefits and challenges.   In multinational operations, nations have to balance 
the collective objectives of the alliance or coalition with their own respective 
national goals.  The commitment by multiple nations to contribute military forces to 
accomplish agreed goals brings three advantages:15
•	 increased political strength and enhanced legitimacy across the international 
community; 
•	 shared risk and cost; and 
•	 increased military capability and effectiveness – perhaps the most difficult to 
exploit to full advantage due to interoperability challenges.
1415
14 S ee AJP-01 for further details.
15 A JP-01, Chapter 5 offers more detail on the benefits/challenges of multinationality as well as planning 
and executing multinational joint operations. 
In multinational operations, nations 
have to balance the collective objectives 
of the alliance or coalition with their 
own respective national goals. 
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   11 03/12/2014   12:48:22

12
JDP 0112
1
Responsibilities
1.20. The Secretary of State for Defence.  The Secretary of State for Defence heads 
the MOD and is responsible for all defence matters as well as providing strategic 
direction, endorsing resource allocation and setting the constraints on the use of 
force.  Force levels and rules of engagement are subject to policy decisions that 
will be made by Ministers, taking into account legal advice.  CDS, Vice Chief of 
the Defence Staff (VCDS) and the Permanent Under Secretary are responsible for 
providing advice to Ministers to inform these decisions.  These decisions are recorded 
in a CDS Planning Directive.16
1.21. The Defence Crisis Management Organisation.  The Defence Crisis Management 
Organisation (DCMO) coordinates input from the Chiefs of Staff Committee, Head 
Office, Joint Forces Command, Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ), Director Special 
Forces and the single-Service commands.  The DCMO is the focus for providing 
Defence advice within the government’s overall management and resolution of 
crises.  It provides the conduit for all briefings to Ministers and directs and monitors 
deployed commands.  This is shown in Figure 1.3 (over).
1.22. Chief of the Defence Staff.  Following the Secretary of State for Defence’s 
direction, CDS (as the military strategic commander) is responsible for the planning, 
direction and conduct of all military operations.  CDS, advised by the VCDS (their 
deputy for operational matters) and the single-Service Chiefs, is responsible for 
formulating the military strategy and making sure it is coherent with government 
policy.  Through a CDS Operation’s Directive,17 CDS:
•	 appoints the operational commander;
•	 provides strategic direction;
•	 identifies the military conditions for success;
•	 designates the theatre and joint operations area;
•	 specifies forces levels and resources;
•	 promulgates the constraints on the use of force; and
•	 sets the strategic defence intelligence requirements.
1.23. The single-Service chiefs.  Both individually, and through the Chiefs of Staff 
Committee, the single-Service Chiefs provide advice to the CDS on how to conduct 
16 S ee Annex 1A
17 S ee Annex 1B
Section 2 – Overview of military planning and  
decision-making
The DCMO is 
the focus for 
providing 
Defence advice 
within the 
government’s 
overall 
management 
and resolution 
of crises.
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   12 03/12/2014   12:48:22

13
JDP 0113
1
Section 2 – Overview of military planning and  
decision-making
current and future operations.  In particular, they advise on how their Service could be 
employed to best effect.
1.24. Head Office.  This Office supports CDS and the Chiefs of Staff Committee in:
•	 developing policy-informed military advice for Ministers on current and 
potential military operations; 
•	 directing the military chain of command; 
•	 ensuring the conduct of the operation reflects the Secretary of State’s 
direction; and
•	 ensuring the conduct of the operation is consistent with wider government 
policy. 
MC
OGD
Allies 
NGO
MOD
DCMO
PJHQ
UK Joint
T ask Force
Commander
(JTFC)
Combined 
Joint T ask Force 
Commander
(CJTFC)
Multinational
Component
Commanders
UK
Component
Commanders
Component
Commanders
Multinational UK
Contingent
Commanders
 UK National
Contingent
Commander
(NCC)
UK
Contingent
Commanders
Theatres of 
operation
Out of 
theatre
Strategic 
direction
Military 
capability 
and 
NSC
ACO
AJFC
NAC
NATO UK
UK
Combined 
Joint T ask Force 
Commander 
Single
Services
Joint 
For
ces 
Command
DSF
Legend
ACO    Allied Command Operations
AJFC        Allied Joint Force Command
CDM        Chief of Defence Materiel
DCMO     Defence Crisis Management Organisation
DSF          Director Special Forces
IO             International organisation
MC           Military Committee
NAC       North Atlantic Council
NATO     North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
NGO      Non-governmental organisation
NSC    National Security Council
OGD       Other governmental department
PJHQ      Permanent J
oint Headquarters
CDM
Tactical level                        Operational level                               Strategic level
Tactics    Operational art           Military strategy              National strategy
IO
advice
Figure 1.3 – UK military planning and decision-making
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   13 03/12/2014   12:48:22

14
JDP 0114
1
The Head Office focuses on the strategic level.  It defines the ways in which military 
force will help achieve our government’s ends (its current and future security 
objectives) and determines the military means required to deliver them. 
Strategy
1.25. Strategic outcome.  The term strategic outcome describes our aim and strategic 
objectives18 for a particular crisis.  How we articulate it will vary depending on:
•	 the nature of the crisis;
•	 the nature of the intended response (with varying degrees of emphasis on 
the diplomatic, economic and military instruments of power); and 
•	 the extent of collaboration envisaged with other nations, multinational 
institutions and international organisations.  
A strategic outcome evolves over time, its definition and detail increasing as a crisis 
unfolds.  Assumptions are inevitable and military commanders must ensure that 
assumptions are revalidated and military activity adjusted as required.  Assumptions:
•	 play an important part in strategic planning;
•	 inform initial planning and how the commander envisages change; 
18  Strategic objectives are reliant upon the contributions made by each of the national instruments of 
power.  In describing strategic outcomes, military-strategic objectives are accompanied by diplomatic and 
economic objectives.
The Head Office focuses on the strategic level
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   14 03/12/2014   12:48:22

15
JDP 0115
1
•	 ensure that long-term contingency planning is not delayed while waiting for 
definitive planning guidance; and
•	 must be recorded for future reference when validating planning. 
1.26. Political-military estimate.  The MOD helps inform national strategy by 
conducting a political-military estimate.  The political-military estimate is seldom 
neatly-bounded from the outset.  Rather, the political-military estimate develops 
over time with the across-government political strategic analysis and the 
continuing national and international political dialogue.  Although it is MOD-led, 
key representation from the Cabinet Office and other government departments 
contribute to the process.  The political-military estimate considers potential crisis 
areas around the world19 and assesses political implications against military feasibility 
and sustainability.  It makes a vital contribution to: 
•	 political-strategic analysis; 
•	 developing national strategy; and 
•	 any decision to initiate a CDS Planning Directive (as shown in Figure 1.1).
1. 27. Military strategy.20  Military strategy is a subset of Defence strategy.  It directs 
the use of the military instrument where it has been identified by the Government 
as part of a UK response to a specific challenge.  Military strategy is a strategic 
headquarters function, owned by CDS and led on his behalf by Deputy Chief of the 
Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations).   Specifically, the aim of military 
strategy is to ensure coherent and effective strategic planning when using our Armed 
Forces.  Military strategy is inherently joint.  It also sits above single-Service interests, 
tying together military capabilities to deliver an effect that meets the short-term 
requirement, but is firmly rooted in a clear understanding of the long-term policy 
ends.  Military strategy has a role to play in developing policy through delivering 
military advice including, ultimately, the advice delivered by CDS to the Prime 
Minister.  It should respond to the requirements asked of it by politicians and policy-
makers, but should also offer up options in support of the Government’s ambitions.  
Importantly, military strategy must, at all times, be rooted in Defence strategy and 
policy.  Operational policy staffs are embedded within the military strategy function 
to ensure that planning and operational delivery take place within the boundaries 
defined by policy. 
19  Prioritised by the Strategic Regional Implementation Group for Defence Engagement (STRIDE).  
Along with the Defence Engagement Board, STRIDE is the senior-level governance structure for defence 
engagement to ensure it delivers against policy goals and is coherent with other Strategic Defence and 
Security Review implementations strategies. 
20  NATO defines military strategy as: that component of national or multinational strategy, presenting 
the manner in which military power should be developed and applied to achieve national objectives or 
those of a group of nations.  AAP-06, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions.
Military 
strategy is 
inherently 
joint.
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   15 03/12/2014   12:48:23

16
JDP 0116
1
1.28. National strategic aim.  Figure 1.4 (page 18) shows how the instruments of 
power combine towards the national strategic aim.  The UK’s strategic aim is the 
Government’s declared purpose in a particular situation.  It is normally expressed 
in terms of reaching a future desired outcome.  The UK’s strategic aim may be 
articulated by Ministers, determined from UK foreign policy statements and official 
records,21 or through discussions between politicians and officials.  Achieving the 
national strategic aim requires across-government and multiple agency contributions.  
The national strategic aim provides the unifying purpose and strategic narrative 
for military and non-military leaders and organisations.22  The ability to influence 
participants involved in a crisis, rather than simply to intervene or act in a given 
situation, is critical to achieving the national strategic aim.  For this reason, a national 
information strategy will normally be formulated by the across-government 
Information Strategy Group.23  The national information strategy articulates policy, 
desired outcomes and the strategic narrative to which all government departments 
must work.24  It includes the themes and messages to be communicated and 
the specific actions to be conducted.  In multinational operations, the national 
information strategy must be nested within that of the Alliance or coalition.
1.29. National strategic objectives.  A national strategic objective is a goal to be 
achieved through one or more instruments of national power to meet the national 
strategic aim.  It may be explicit, or deduced from government policy, strategic 
direction or the decisions of the National Security Council.  Strategic objectives are 
likely to require significant coordination across inter-governmental, international 
and departmental boundaries,25 even if allocated to a particular department to lead.  
In practice, formulating strategic objectives by consensus may be challenging.  The 
process should be coordinated centrally, for example, through the Cabinet or National 
Security Council.  Figure 1.4 also shows the diplomatic and economic contributions 
alongside the military contribution.  Of note, the NATO definition of objective is ‘..a 
clearly defined and attainable goal for a military operation’.26  UK commanders and 
planners in NATO operations must appreciate the distinction between our national 
and NATO’s use of the term.
21  For example: minutes of Cabinet, National Security Council, Cabinet sub-committees and 
engagements with multinational partners.
22  Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 1/12, Strategic Communication: The Defence Contribution  describes narratives 
as compelling story lines which explain events convincingly and from which inferences can be drawn.
23  National information strategy is the coordinated information output of all government activity, 
undertaken to influence approved audiences to support policy objectives.  ( JDP 3-45.1, Media Operations).
24  Strategic narrative is described as communication that portrays a story designed to resonate in the 
mind of the audience that helps explain the campaign strategy and operational plan.  ( JDP 3-40, Security 
and Stabilisation: The Military Contribution ).
25  See COPD page 1-15 which identifies how a NATO contribution of political and military effect is 
nested within a broader spectrum of international activity.
26  Op.cit., AAP-06; objective: a clearly defined and attainable goal for a military operation, for example 
seizing a terrain feature, neutralizing an adversary’s force or capability or achieving some other desired 
outcome that is essential to a commander’s plan and towards which the operation is directed.
Strategic 
objectives are 
likely to require 
significant 
coordination 
across inter-
governmental, 
international and 
departmental 
boundaries.
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   16 03/12/2014   12:48:23

17
JDP 0117
1
1.30. Military contribution to the national strategic aim and national strategic 
objectives.  The military strategic end-state is the extent of the military contribution 
to meeting the national strategic aim and objectives.  The military contribution must 
align with the diplomatic and economic contributions towards the same national 
strategic aim.
1.31. Military strategic objectives.  The extent of the military contribution to the 
national strategic aim should be expressed in terms of military strategic objectives.  
Military strategic objectives may be discrete, support, or be supported by, other 
departments or agencies.  Military strategic objectives both define and limit the 
military commitment.  They are developed from one or more military response 
options.27  Once all objectives are achieved, this indicates the conclusion of the 
military effort (noting that others may remain involved long after security has been 
re-established).  The military commitment may also be redefined to meet revised 
aims.  Within the resources and constraints assigned to him, a Joint Force Commander 
(JFC)28 is responsible for achieving these military strategic objectives.  JFCs attain their 
military strategic objectives through one or more operations, each with specified 
operations objectives.
1.32. Turning military strategic objectives into an operations plan.  The aim of all 
crisis management activity is to reach a desired outcome.  However, direct correlation 
between objectives being achieved and a desired outcome being reached (favourable 
conditions ‘having been’ created) should not be taken as given when planning.  This is 
because:
•	 crises are complex and that makes them inherently unpredictable;
•	 the effects, or conditions cannot always be created as desired and, even if 
created as intended, may not always generate the desired outcome and may 
create others;  
•	 the desired outcome may be reached without the identified objectives being 
achieved;
•	 while the foreseen consequences of activities, whether desirable or not, 
can be planned for (and associated risks duly managed) the unforeseen 
consequences cannot;
•	 crises are not amenable to precise management or control;
•	 conditions exist, or not, as a result of a myriad of factors and influences; and
•	 while commanders may be expected to achieve realistic objectives, they 
cannot necessarily create specific conditions on the ground.
27 S ee AJP-5 and COPD for further detail.
28  JFC: Throughout this publication Joint Force Commander (JFC) is used when referring to the 
operational-level commander of a joint force, regardless of how it has been constructed (for example 
Joint Task Force (JTF), Deployed Joint Task Force (DJTF) or Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF)).  JFC is used 
in this way throughout NATO doctrine.  The UK’s Joint Forces Command will not be abbreviated in this 
document.
The desired 
outcome may 
be reached 
without the 
identified 
objectives 
being achieved.
”
“
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   17 03/12/2014   12:48:23

18
JDP 0118
1
National strategic aim
(NATO desired end-state)
National strategic objectives
(NATO strategic objectives)
Military strategic 
end-state
Military 
strategic 
objective
Military 
strategic 
objective
Military 
strategic 
objective
Economic 
contribution
Diplomatic 
contribution
Operational-level 
objectives
Operation end-state
Theatre
Cabinet
Across 
government
Operational- 
level planning 
Strategic 
planning
Achieved through military/joint force activity alone
Achieved through civil-military cooperation
Legend
Operational-level 
objectives
Figure 1.4 – Instruments of power combine towards national strategic aim
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   18 03/12/2014   12:48:23

19
JDP 0119
1
The national strategic aim is the government’s declared purpose in a particular 
situation, normally expressed in terms of reaching a future desired outcome.  In a 
NATO context this would be coincident with, or contribute to, the NATO desired 
end-state.1  (End-state: the political and/or military situation to be attained at 
the end of an operation, which indicates that the objective has been achieved.)        
(AAP-06) 
The desired outcome is a favourable and enduring situation, consistent with 
political direction, reached through intervention or as a result of some other form 
of influence.  It invariably requires contributions from all instruments of power; it 
should be determined collectively.
The national strategic aim provides the unifying purpose for strategic- and 
operational-level commanders, and leaders from non-military organisations.
A national strategic objective is a goal to be achieved by one or more instruments 
of national power to meet the national strategic aim.  In a NATO context these 
would be coincident with, or contribute to, NATO strategic objectives.  
Military strategy is that component of national or multinational strategy, 
presenting the manner in which military power should be applied to achieve 
national objectives or those of a group of nations.  (AAP-06).
The military strategic end-state is the extent of the military contribution to meeting 
the national strategic aim, expressed as a series of military strategic objectives. 
Military strategic objectives are goals to be achieved by the military to meet 
the national strategic aim (and are the responsibility of the military-strategic 
commander (CDS)).  NATO uses the same term; the NATO military strategic 
objectives are derived from the strategic objectives and ‘owned’ by the Supreme 
Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR).
An objective is a clearly defined and attainable goal for a military operation, for 
example seizing a terrain feature, neutralizing an adversary’s force or capability or 
achieving some other desired outcome that is essential to a commander’s plan and 
towards which the operation is directed (AAP-06).
(See Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-40 Security and Stabilisation: The Military 
Contribution, Figure 10.5 for a cross-government terminology comparator.  https://
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/49948/
jdp3_40a4.pdf).
1 S ee AJP-01 and AJP-5.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   19 03/12/2014   12:48:23

20
JDP 0120
1
1.33. Operations objectives.  The relationship between military strategic objectives 
and contributory operations objectives is important.  Operations objectives relate to 
a single theatre of operations and are ‘owned’ by the respective JFC.  While JFCs may 
achieve their assigned objectives, other contributions may be required to achieve the 
desired outcome.  These include strategic-level contributions made by forces retained 
under the command of the military strategic commander.  On a larger scale, achieving 
military strategic objectives may require a number of JFCs, in different theatres, to 
complete their respective operations objectives.  Multinational operations add a 
further level of complexity to the process of developing operations objectives.  This 
complexity can be mitigated by trusted partnerships founded on common doctrine, 
training and experience. 
1.34. Military strategic direction.  Operations design at the operational level is 
initiated by a CDS’ planning directive, which is issued to the Joint Commander 
(normally the Chief of Joint Operations (CJO)).  Once the Prime Minister decides 
to commit military resources, CDS’ Operations Directive provides authority to 
conduct operations.  Annexes 1A and 1B are illustrative examples of CDS’ Planning 
and Operation’s Directives – they are for guidance only and can be modified as 
described.29  Small deployments or tasks should not require every aspect of the 
directives to be completed; operational staff work must always be concise.  
1.35. Strategic communication.  Strategic communication is defined as: advancing 
national interests by using all Defence means of communication to influence the 
attitudes and behaviours of people.30  It is primarily a philosophy, partly a capability 
and partly a process.  Philosophy is the key element since it underpins aligning 
words, images and actions to realise influence.The CDS’ Planning and Operations 
Directives will articulate the desired information effect31 to the JFC, who will deliver 
the operational-level military contribution as part of the wider across-government 
strategic communication for an operation. This should be articulated through a 
strategic narrative or, where extra focus is required, a MOD departmental narrative32 
from which JFCs will derive their key themes and messages.  Themes provide 
an overarching concept or intention, designed for broad communication, while 
messages comprise narrowly focused communication directed at a specific target 
audience.  In this way JFCs ensure that strategic communication can be supported by 
the deeds of the joint task force.
29  DCMO Standing Operating Procedures detail the process.
30 O p. Cit., JDN 1/12.  This is a distillation of the National Security Council draft definition of ‘the 
systematic and coordinated use of all means of communication to deliver UK national security objectives 
by influencing the attitudes and behaviours of individuals, groups and states’.
31  Information effect is defined in JDN 1/12 as: the resultant attitudes and behaviours of audiences 
produced by words, images and actions. 
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   20 03/12/2014   12:48:23

21
JDP 0121
1
•	 The decision to commit the Armed 
Forces to operations rests with the Prime 
Minister, informed by the Cabinet and 
National Security Council, with advice 
from Secretary of State for Defence and 
CDS.
•	 The National Security Council integrates, 
at the highest level, the work of the 
departments of state and other parts 
of government contributing to national 
security. 
•	 The Prime Minister and National Security 
Council, advised by the MOD and 
other government departments, set 
the strategic priorities for Defence and 
security.
•	 Strategy determines the ways and means 
of achieving the ends.
•	 Political-strategic analysis seeks to 
balance national priorities and resources 
in often complex and ambiguous 
circumstances. 
•	 Collective decision-making within central 
government is delivered through the 
Cabinet committee system.
•	 The UK can commit military forces 
on alliance or coalition operations as 
the framework or lead nation, or as 
a contributing nation.  The reality is 
complicated by political, doctrinal, 
interoperability and legal considerations.
•	 Motives why nations, groups or individuals 
become part of a coalition include 
commitment to collective responsibility, 
self-interest, fear, self-preservation, 
shared values and beliefs, efficiency, and 
humanitarian concern. 
•	 Secretary of State for Defence provides 
strategic direction, endorses resource 
allocation and sets the constraints on 
the use of force. 
•	 The Head Office defines the ways 
in which military force will help 
achieve our government’s ends and 
determines the military means to 
deliver them.
•	 The MOD helps inform national 
strategy by conducting a political-
military estimate.  
•	 The national strategic aim provides 
the unifying purpose and strategic 
narrative for military and non-military 
leaders and organisations.
•	 A JFC is responsible for achieving 
military strategic objectives through 
one or more operations.
•	 On a larger scale, achieving military 
strategic objectives may require a 
number of JFCs, in different theatres, 
to achieve their respective operation’s 
objectives. 
Key points
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   21 03/12/2014   12:48:23

22
JDP 0122
1
The Annex forms an illustrative example of the content of a CDS planning directive.  
It does not constitute a template which is controlled by MOD staff.
This example is for guidance only.  You can make, where appropriate, changes.  You do not 
need to keep to paragraph numbers – for example there may be one or more paragraphs 
per heading.  It is, however, essential to keep the order of the paragraph headings so that 
an auditable and recognisable logic chain is kept.  Where headings are inappropriate or not 
needed, this should be stated.
Notes:
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   22 03/12/2014   12:48:23

23
JDP 0123
1
Annex 1A – Representative 
Chief of Defence Staff’s 
Planning Directive
Issued by: C hief of Defence Staff (CDS) and Chiefs of Staff (COS) 
Issued to: M OD Directorates 
                                  Single-Service Chiefs 
                                  Joint Forces Command 
                                  Permanent Joint Headquarters UK (PJHQ UK) 
                                  Director Special Forces (DSF) 
Copy to:                  O ther government departments (OGDs) as required
Directive to be completed through parallel staffing chain to 3 star level.
For directives, this is normally through CJO and DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)                   
chains-of-command.  The process culminates when DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)-MA2 
forwards the directive to Secretariat Chief of Staff for approval.  Until the draft leaves 
DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)-MA2 – or equivalent – the document is being drafted for the 
appropriate 3* approval.  On leaving the 3* office, the directive is ‘confirmed ready in 
all respects for signature by CDS.
The Annex forms an illustrative example of the content of a CDS planning directive.  
It does not constitute a template which is controlled by MOD staff.
This example is for guidance only.  You can make, where appropriate, changes.  You do not 
need to keep to paragraph numbers – for example there may be one or more paragraphs 
per heading.  It is, however, essential to keep the order of the paragraph headings so that 
an auditable and recognisable logic chain is kept.  Where headings are inappropriate or not 
needed, this should be stated.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   23 03/12/2014   12:48:23

24
JDP 0124
1
CDS’ Planning Directive Op [****]
Preface 
1. Review.  [Who will review the directive (usually Deputy Chief of Defence Staff 
(Military Strategy and Operations) (DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)) and when eg 6/12/18 
months hence].
2. Scope.  [Indicates the bounds of the directive and whether it supersedes a 
previous version].
Situation
3. [Brief description of the nature of the problem, the current political/military 
situation and what has been/is being done to address it.  This may be broken down 
into background and current situation, if required]. 
Appointment
4. [If determined at this time] CDS has confirmed the appointment of [****] [Chief 
of Joint Operations (CJO) or 4* as appropriate] as Joint Commander (Jt Comd) [or 
designate] for this operation [potential operation].  
Theatre of operations
5. [If determined at this time] Defined as the land, sea and air space of .... [A 
geographical area, or more precisely a space, defined by the military-strategic 
authority, which includes and surrounds the area delegated to a Joint Task Force 
Commander (termed the joint operations area (JOA), within which they conduct 
operations].
Direction
6. National strategic aim.32   [‘the Government’s declared purpose in a particular 
situation, normally expressed in terms of reaching a future desired outcome’.  The 
desired outcome is ‘a favourable and enduring situation, consistent with political 
direction, reached through intervention and/or as a result of some other form of 
influence’.  It invariably requires contributions from all instruments of power; it should 
be determined collectively.  The national strategic aim provides the unifying purpose 
for strategic and operational level commanders, and leaders from non-military 
organisations]. 
32 T his may be referred to as Her Majesty’s Government’s (HMG’s) strategic aim.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   24 03/12/2014   12:48:23

25
JDP 0125
1
7. National strategic objective.  [‘a goal to be achieved by one or more instruments 
of national power in order to meet the national strategic aim’.  Note the difference 
between a desired outcome being reached and objectives being achieved; there 
can be no assumption of necessary causality.  Not the effects, nor conditions, nor 
the outcome ultimately sought, can necessarily be created as desired – although the 
achievement of specific objectives can contribute].
8. Military strategic end-state.  [‘the successful completion of the military 
contribution to the desired outcome, reached when all the allocated military strategic 
objectives have been achieved’].
9. Military strategic objectives.  [‘goals to be achieved by the military instrument of 
power in order to contribute to the achievement of the national strategic aim’.  Their 
successful completion indicates the achievement of the military strategic end-state].
10. Strategic narrative.  [‘the compelling storylines designed to resonate in the mind 
of its audiences that helps explain the campaign strategy and operational plan’].
11. Information effect.  [‘the resultant attitude and behaviour of audiences 
produced by the combination of words, images and deeds’].   
12. CDS’ Intent.  [A succinct articulation of CDS’ military strategic intent, including 
the strategic effects military forces are to realise, or contribute to, in collaboration 
with other government departments under an integrated approach].  
Planning
13. You are to work with MOD Staff [Military Strategic Planning (MSP) Staff or the 
Strategic Planning Group (SPG)] to prepare a military strategic estimate for...
14. In consultation with MOD HQ, Joint Forces Command and the single-Services, 
you are to recommend:
•	 What, if any, immediately available forces should be directed to move to 
the likely area of operations [operational command (OPCOM) arrangements 
of these forces to be considered prior to the issue of the CDS operations 
directive].33 
33 C ommand states are detailed in AJP-3 Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (available on 
the Defence Intranet).   
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   25 03/12/2014   12:48:23

26
JDP 0126
1
•	 The appropriate level of Joint Force Commander (JFC).34
•	 The size and shape of the joint force.
15. You are to deploy an Operational Liaison and Reconnaissance Team (OLRT) to 
[region/country] in order to [purpose of the Operational Liaison and Reconnaissance 
Team – see Chapter 3].
16. Assumptions.  [The strategic assumptions on which military planning is to take 
place].
17. Constraints, restraints, limitations and freedoms.  [To include legal, political, 
diplomatic, cultural, military (if known)]. 
18. Further instructions to follow.
Execution
19. In your capacity as Jt Comd you are to….
20. Coordinating instructions.  [This paragraph may be issued separately if required].  
To include:
•	 legal.
•	 political/rules of engagement.
•	 intelligence.
•	 targeting.
•	 information strategy.  [Issued here or separately by the Information Strategy 
Group.  This should include media policy as appropriate].
•	 force protection.
Resources
21. Task organisation.  [If known at this stage].
22. Impact on current commitments and future availability of forces.  [This section 
records the MOD headquarters decision on the regeneration of capacity and 
adjustments in readiness to meet future contingencies].
34 J FC: Throughout this publication Joint Force Commander (JFC) is used when referring to the 
operational-level commander of a joint force, regardless of how it has been constructed (for example 
Joint Task Force (JTF), Deployed Joint Task Force (DJTF) or Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF)).  JFC is used 
in this way throughout NATO doctrine.  The UK’s Joint Forces Command will not be abbreviated in this 
document.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   26 03/12/2014   12:48:23

27
JDP 0127
1
Logistics
23. Statement of logistic capability.  [To state any sustainment and training 
requirements, and provide indication of the availability of critical assets (if known)].
Command and signal
24. Command.  The Jt Comd is to exercise command from Permanent Joint 
Headquarters [or other designated headquarters].
25. Codeword.  The codeword for this operation is [****].  This codeword is OFFICIAL-
SENSITIVE; however, its meaning is SECRET.  
26. Signals.  All message traffic on Op [****] is to bear the SIC [XXX], in addition to 
subject SICs.
Reporting
27. An executive summary of the military strategic estimate and proposed strategic 
options is to be submitted by [****].
DTG Z         C hief of the Defence Staff 
                                                                                                      [Original signed] 
                                                                                                     Authenticated 
                                                                                                     DOps
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   27 03/12/2014   12:48:23

28
JDP 0128
1
The Annex forms an illustrative example of the content of a CDS operation’s directive.                    
 It does not constitute a template which is controlled by MOD staff.
This document is the property of Her Britannic Majesty’s 
Government and is not to be reproduced without the 
permission of the Secretary, Chiefs of Staff Committee
CDS No/Year      Copy No…..of……Copies
The CDS operation’s directive number is obtained from the CDS-Desk Clk1 (Ext 87690)
The final document for CDS signature should be in Arial – Font 12.  The use of 
acronyms should be minimised to ensure clarity. 
Formats and font size for signals should be as required by the signal software.
Experience has shown that, when drafting an operations directive, it is often better to 
draft as per the rules and conventions of Defence writing and then convert to signal 
format.
Ministry of Defence
Chiefs of Staff Committee
CDS operation’s directive [Cat 1, 2 or 3] [to] for [subject] 
Operation [****]
[A very short abstract paragraph outlining the scope of the operations directive to be 
drafted by the author.  This is used by the registry for filing purposes].
Annex 1B – Representative 
Chief of Defence Staff’s 
Operation’s Directive
This example is for guidance only.  Deviations, where appropriate, are permitted.  It is not 
necessary to keep to paragraph numbers – for example there may be one or more paragraphs 
per heading.  It is, however, essential to maintain the order of the paragraph headings so that 
an auditable and recognisable logic chain is maintained.  Where headings are inappropriate or 
not needed, this should be stated.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   28 03/12/2014   12:48:23

29
JDP 0129
1
The Annex forms an illustrative example of the content of a CDS operation’s directive.                    
 It does not constitute a template which is controlled by MOD staff.
Signature Block 
COSSEC – ASec(Cts) 
for SECCOS 
MOD HQ, Floor 5, Zone F 
82019MB 
DII: COSSEC ASEC (CTS)
Ministry of Defence 
WHITEHALL 
SW1A 2HB 
Date: DD/MMM/YY 
CDS No/Yr
Operation’s directive to be completed through parallel staffing chain to 3* level
For operations directives this is normally through CJO and DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops) 
chains of Command.  The process culminates when DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)-MA2 
forwards the directive to SECCOS for approval.  Until the draft leaves DCDS (Mil Strat 
& Ops)-MA2 – or equivalent – the document is being drafted for the appropriate 3 
Star’s approval.  On leaving the 3 Star’s office, the directive is ‘confirmed ready in all 
respects for signature by CDS’.
To generate tempo for an immediate response to short notice crises, it may be 
recommended to CDS, through DOps, that a number of paragraphs or annexes are 
deferred until a later date.  This will be initiated by a strategic planning group team 
leader in consultation with the joint commander.    
This example is for guidance only.  Deviations, where appropriate, are permitted.  It is not 
necessary to keep to paragraph numbers – for example there may be one or more paragraphs 
per heading.  It is, however, essential to maintain the order of the paragraph headings so that 
an auditable and recognisable logic chain is maintained.  Where headings are inappropriate or 
not needed, this should be stated.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   29 03/12/2014   12:48:23

30
JDP 0130
1
CDS’ Operation’s Directive [Cat 1,2 or 3] [to] for [subject] 
Operation [****]
References:
A.  [Only include References referred to within main body]
General
1. Review and responsibility.  This operations directive supersedes [previous 
directive] and gives my direction to you, [the Joint Commander (Jt Comd)/
as required], for planning the UK’s future military commitment [to / in …].  This 
operations directive will be reviewed by [author] no later than [date].35
2. Appointment.  [Nomination of Jt Comd and broad illustration of responsibilities. 
Example: You are appointed Jt Comd for Op [****] and you are to exercise operational 
command (OPCOM) of UK forces assigned to the operation from Permanent Joint 
Headquarters (PJHQ) Northwood.  Within your area of responsibility (AOR), you are 
responsible to me for the conduct of operations of all assigned UK naval, land, and 
air forces, including their intelligence, logistics, communications, administrative, and 
medical support].
3. Direction.  I shall provide strategic direction for operations through Deputy 
Chief of Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations) (DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)) [or 
alternative commander].
4. Task organisation.  UK forces assigned to this operation are detailed at Annex 
xx.  Any recommendations for proposed change should be made to MOD where 
appropriate.
Military options.  [A brief description of…]
5. Consultation and management of expectation.  [A brief description of...]
Current situation
[A brief description of nature of the problem and what has been/is currently being 
done in mitigation.  This section is often broken into political and operational 
35  The review date will be retained against the directive for monitoring purposes by COSSEC/CDS 
Registry, but it is the responsibility of the author to review the document and to propose any changes/
updates required.  The author may also propose the directive to be cancelled.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   30 03/12/2014   12:48:24

31
JDP 0131
1
paragraphs but could be broken down into sub-headings of background and current 
situation, if required].
6. Political.   
7. Military.
8. Humanitarian.
HMG’s strategic aim
9. [National intent and position as articulated by Cabinet Office in consultation 
with other government departments (OGDs)].
HMG’S objectives    
10. HMG’s objectives are as follows: 
a. Political objectives.  
b. Military strategic objectives.  [Derived from national strategic objectives, 
these objectives define criteria for success – their successful achievement 
indicates the military strategic end-state]. 
c. Information effect.  [Derived from the strategic narrative, this defines the 
resultant attitude and behaviour of audiences produced by the combination of 
words, images and deeds].   
CDS intent   
11. My intent is to [This is the part in which CDS will state his intent, therefore it 
must accurately reflect what the military is expected to have to achieve.
It should be succinct, clear and offer subordinates an understanding of their role to 
enable them to achieve his intent.  
It must reflect military-strategic level intent avoiding, where possible, operational and 
tactical level direction, be in effects based language and incorporate the integrated 
approach if required.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   31 03/12/2014   12:48:24

32
JDP 0132
1
With directives dealing with major campaigns there may be benefit in articulating 
intent through a CDS’ military strategy paragraph, which should include intent, 
approach and main effort.]
Execution   
12. [This specifies the detailed effects to be achieved by the Jt Comd and 
subordinate commands as appropriate. The Strategic Planning Directive and 
summary of options from the military strategic estimate will form the basis for this 
paragraph and should reflect the mission statement and tasks generated by the Jt 
Comd].
a. Main effort.
b. Specified tasks.  
Constraints and/or assumptions
13. The following are additional constraints:
a. Joint area of operations. 
b. International and domestic law.
[as required] – could include: UN instructions or protocols, detention, other 
operations, political 
Coordinating instructions
14. The following instructions apply: 
a. Rules of engagement (ROE).    
b. Intelligence and security.    
c. Key themes and messages.     
d. Training.  
e. Force protection (FP).
f. UK Special Forces (SF). 
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   32 03/12/2014   12:48:24

33
JDP 0133
1
Service and administrative support
15. [Detail should be kept to a minimum and if necessary reflected in the 
appropriate Annex].  Headings might include: 
a. logistic planning – logistic governance – sustainability.
b. movement.    
c. medical.   
d. financial accounting and host nation support.    
e. welfare and personnel.   
f. managing casualties.  
g. repatriating the dead.  
h. welfare and personnel.  
Command and signal
16. The following arrangements will apply: [Layout below is illustrative and could be 
used for a multinational operation] 
a. Relationships.   
(1) National.
•	 Strategic.   
•	 Operational.   
(2) NATO/EU/UN.   
b. Command and control.36 
(1) National command.  All UK forces remain under national command.
36  Command states are detailed in AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (available on 
the Defence Intranet).  
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   33 03/12/2014   12:48:24

34
JDP 0134
1
(2) Full command.  Single-Service Commanders retain full command of 
all forces assigned.  Director Special Forces (DSF) retains full command of 
all assigned SF.
(3) Operational command.  You are to exercise OPCOM of UK assigned 
naval, land and air forces.
(4) Operational control.  You may delegate operational control (OPCON) 
of UK assigned forces in theatre to the Joint Force Commander (JFC),37 
once his HQ is established.  OPCON of submarines will remain with CTF31 1.  
OPCON of SF forces will remain with DSF unless D Ops directs otherwise.
(5) National Contingent Commander.  Usually embedded within a 
joint task force headquarters when the UK is a contributing nation to 
a multinational force.  The relationship and division of responsibility 
between the National Contingent Commander and the Permanent Joint 
Headquarters must be made explicit.
c. Signals.  All message traffic on OP XX is to bear the SIC XXX/XXX in 
addition to subject SICs.
d. Information management/information exploitation plan.  DII(HO) is the 
MODUK Information System (IS) of choice for the transfer, publishing and filing 
of strategic information up to UK SECRET.  Documents will be published by the 
Current Commitments Team (CCT), Defence Crisis Management Centre (DCMC) 
or PJHQ on the Defence Crisis Management Organisation (DCMO) website under 
OP XX using the team site hosted on DII.
e. Communications security (COMSEC)/computer security (COMPUSEC).  
Reporting
18. [Reflect strategic and military strategic battle rhythm requirements: example 
– until further notice; you are to keep MODUK HQ informed by Daily Brief at 0600z.]
37  JFC: Throughout this publication Joint Force Commander (JFC) is used when referring to the 
operational-level commander of a joint force, regardless of how it has been constructed (for example 
Joint Task Force (JTF), Deployed Joint Task Force (DJTF) or Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF)).  JFC is used 
in this way throughout NATO doctrine.  The UK’s Joint Forces Command will not be abbreviated in this 
document.
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   34 03/12/2014   12:48:24

35
JDP 0135
1
Codeword   
19. T he codeword for [subject] is [Op Name] in response to.  Its meaning is 
[CLASSIFICATION].
Day/Month/Year      C hief of the Defence Staff
CDS No/Yr
Annexes:
[The full list of possible Annexes is in the Comprehensive Operations Planning 
Directive (COPD), Annex C.38  Requirement to be determined by the author.]
38  Allied Command Operations Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive .
National processes National processes
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   35 03/12/2014   12:48:24

20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   36 03/12/2014   12:48:25

2
Operational-level 
planning
Chapter 2 addresses developing strategic direction 
as well as planning and managing the military 
contribution to multinational, multi-agency and 
national operations. 
 
 
 
Chapter 2
JDP 01
37
Section 1 – Operations design   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
Section 2 – Multinational crisis management   . . . . . . . .  43
Section 3 – Multi-agency crisis management   . . . . . . . .  46
Section 4 – UK Defence’s approach   . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
Section 5 – Operations led by the EU, US and UN . . . . . .  61
Annex 2A – Planning with other government  
departments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  67
Annex 2B – Crisis management groups  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 75
Annex 2C – Planning at the strategic and  
operational level  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  80
Appendix 2C1 – Planning processes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 84
Annex 2D – Representative Joint Commander’s     
Mission Directive .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 87
Annex 2E – European Union military planning . . . . . . . .  93
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   37 03/12/2014   12:48:25

38
JDP 01
238
Section 1 – Operations design 
In preparing for battle 
 I have always found that plans are 
useless, but planning is indispensable.
 
Dwight D Eisenhower ”
“
The commander must decide how he will 
fight the battle before it begins. He must 
then decide who he will use the military 
effort at his disposal to force the battle to 
swing the way he wishes it to go; he must 
make the enemy dance to his tune from 
the beginning and not vice versa.
 
Viscount Montgomery”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   38 03/12/2014   12:48:26

39
JDP 0139
2
Chapter 2 – Operational-
level planning
2.1. The operational level is: the level of operations at which campaigns and major 
operations are planned, conducted and sustained to accomplish strategic objectives 
within theatres or areas of operations.39  The scale and level of command at the 
operational level is not pre-defined but should assume a size and shape that meets 
the demands of the operation.  Depending on the operation type and scale, the 
operational level could be at component command.  The operational level is therefore 
best defined by function.  The operational level provides the link and gearing 
between strategic objectives and the tactical employment of forces.  Without this link, 
it is unlikely that tactical actions will lead to achieving the desired end-state.  Activities 
must be linked by the operational level to the aims of the overall strategy, but the 
strategy should also be linked through the operational level to what is tactically 
realistic; this is operations design.
2.2. The main activities within operations design are analysis and planning.  Analysis 
is continuous.  Operations planning is initiated if a major contingency is anticipated, 
or a change to an existing plan is required.40
2.3. Analysis.  Before embarking on an operational-level planning process, a Joint 
Force Commander (JFC)41 requires a thorough and up-to-date understanding42 of the 
strategic context.  The process of analysis, underpinned by intelligence, informs the 
JFC who then applies their reasoning and judgment to develop and execute 
military operations.  Understanding is crucial; it provides insight and foresight on 
what can, and cannot, be influenced, and where the boundaries lie. 
39 M odified AAP-6 definition taken from Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine .
40 Ana lysis and planning are addressed in AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-Level Planning  and 
the associated UK national text and the Allied Command Operations Comprehensive Operations Planning 
Directive (COPD). 
41  J FC – throughout this publication, Joint Force Commander (JFC) is used when referring to the 
operational-level commander of a joint force, regardless of how it has been constructed (for example, 
Joint Task Force (JTF)/Deployed Joint Task Force (DJTF)/Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF)).  JFC is used 
in this way throughout NATO doctrine.  The UK’s Joint Forces Command will not be abbreviated in this 
document.
42  S ee JDP 04, Understanding .
Section 1 – Operations design 
Operations 
design consists 
of analysis and 
planning.
”
“
”
”
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   39 03/12/2014   12:48:26

40
JDP 01
240
2.4. Planning.  Planning must answer three questions: 
•	 what are the features of the current (crisis) situation; 
•	 what should the (more favourable) situation look like at the end; and 
•	 how should the situation change or be changed?
Planning addresses how to attain specified objectives designed to contribute to close 
the gap between the current situation and the desired outcome.  Achieving the end-
state is not a discrete activity, but rather it is nested within a broader framework.
a. Military actions (to realise specific effects and subsequently attain 
objectives) are frequently inter-woven with the actions, intended effects, and 
associated objectives of other non-military actors.  Whether or not such  
inter-dependencies are reflected in formal supporting and supported 
relationships, participants are unlikely to be entirely effective without 
coordination and cooperation.
b. Operations planning links strategic ends with tactical action.  Ends and 
action are dynamic and subject to:
•	 the constraints and urgencies of time;
•	 changes in political intent and strategic priorities (potentially spanning 
a number of concurrent operations) which influence an operation from 
above; and 
•	 changes in the tactical situation (including correlating forces) which 
influence an operation from below.
2.5. Collaborative planning.  JFCs will have to synchronise their work with that of 
other nations, commanders, headquarters, departments and agencies.  JFCs should 
consult to get their views and conduct initial planning early to inform subsequent 
discussions.  Collaborative planning is more effective when a commander and all 
planning contributors are physically collocated.  This encourages full participation, 
detailed negotiation, and the timely and equitable consideration of all points of 
view.  The understanding stage must involve the commander.  Thereafter, where 
commanders themselves cannot participate personally, then trusted and empowered 
representatives should act on their behalf to maintain momentum.
2.6. Planning doctrine and processes.  Operations design is outlined in Allied Joint 
Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine.  The doctrine for operational-level planning 
is addressed in AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-Level Planning (with national 
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   40 03/12/2014   12:48:26

41
JDP 0141
2
green text) and the necessary processes in the Comprehensive Operations Planning 
Directive (COPD).  AJP-5 contains:
•	 an overview of NATO planning;
•	 doctrine on operational art and design within operational-level planning; and
•	 detail on conducting the operational-level planning process including the 
operational-level estimate.
The COPD provides: 
•	 an overview of NATO crisis management and planning;
•	 procedures on developing situational awareness;
•	 the planning process at the NATO strategic level;
•	 the planning process at the operational level;
•	 operations assessment; and
•	 all relevant formats.
2 .7. AJP-5’s operational-level planning process nests within the NATO crisis 
management process described in the COPD.  Figure 2.1 (on the next page) shows 
these linkages. 
Understanding is crucial; 
it provides insight and 
foresight.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   41 03/12/2014   12:48:26

42
JDP 01
242
Figure 2.1 – Linkages between strategic and operational-level planning
SHAPE strategic operations planning
Phase 1
Indicators and 
warnings of 
potential crisis
Phase 2
Assessment 
of the crisis
Phase 3
Military 
response 
options 
development
Phase 4a
Strategic 
CONOPS
development
Phase 4b
Strategic OPLAN
development,
force generation  
Phase 5
Execution 
assessment 
and OPLAN 
review
Phase 6
Transition
Operational 
level 
OPLAN
Disengagement
planning
Step 8
Campaign 
assessment, 
plan review 
and revision
Step 7
CONOPS and 
OPLAN 
development
Step 1
Initiation of 
the OLPP
Step 2
Problem and 
mission analysis
Step 3 - COA development
Step 4 - COA analysis
Step 5 - COA validation and comparison
Step 6 - Commander’s COA decision
Shared
situational
awareness
Warning order 
and SACEUR’s
strategic 
assessment draft 
MROs
Strategic 
CONOPS
Operational 
CONOPS
Approved
Operational 
CONOPS
Strategic
OPLAN
Periodic
mission review
assessment
Activation 
order
JFC Operational-level planning process
Strategic planning 
directive
Operational 
advice
Legend
COA Course of action  OPLAN Operational plan
CONOPS Concept of operations  MRO Military response optionJFC Joint Force Commander  SACEUR Supreme Allied Commander EuropeOLPP Operational-level planning process SHAPE Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe
Section 2 – Multinational crisis management
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   42 03/12/2014   12:48:26

43
JDP 0143
2
2.8. UK commitment to multinational operations.  Multinational operations are 
normally facilitated by selecting a lead or framework nation, in many cases under 
the mandate of the UN or other recognised international organisation.43  However, 
multilateral planning may have no specified lead nation, particularly when nations’ 
levels of commitment have yet to be determined.  When the UK is considering 
whether to contribute to a multinational operation, the MOD provides advice on the 
level of any UK military commitment, and the associated military strategic objectives.  
2.9. Permanent Joint Headquarters in multinational operations.  Chief of Defence 
(CDS) delegates operational command (OPCOM) of UK forces to a nominated UK 
Joint Commander (normally Commander Joint Operations (CJO)).  CJO may further 
delegate operational control (OPCON), tactical command (TACOM) or tactical control 
(TACON) to a subordinate UK or multinational commander.44
a. UK-led operations.  When the UK is the lead/framework nation, Permanent 
Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) forms the nucleus of the multinational headquarters, 
augmented as necessary by staff from other participating nations.  The UK 
also provides staff to form the nucleus of a deployed multinational Joint Force 
Headquarters (JFHQ).
b. Non UK-led operations.  When the UK is not the lead or framework nation, 
CJO acts as UK coordinator of supporting command functions and coordinates 
the activities of the single-Services and the Joint Forces Command in deploying, 
sustaining and recovering UK forces assigned to the operation.  CJO may 
also provide staff from PJHQ to a multinational headquarters and will specify 
national caveats.
2.10. The Joint Force Commander in multinational operations.  To understand the 
effect JFC’s actions may have on coalition cohesion, they must know the terms 
and conditions under which other nations contingents have been provided.  CJO, 
acting as the coordinator of supporting command functions, should ensure that 
multinational objectives complement those of the UK and that the proposed UK 
contribution is feasible within available capabilities.  Other nations’ liaison officers 
based at PJHQ, and reciprocal UK liaison officers based abroad, provide valuable links 
with other nations’ military planning headquarters.
43 F orces generated under a ‘framework nation’ are commanded by an officer from that nation, which 
also provides a significant proportion of the staff and support to the headquarters.  ( JDP 3-00, Campaign 
Execution, 3rd Edition).  Note: the framework nation is likely to tell the language and procedures adopted.
44  T hese command states are defined in AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations ..
Section 2 – Multinational crisis management
CJO coordinates 
the activities 
of the single-
Services 
and the 
Joint Forces 
Command 
in deploying, 
sustaining and 
recovering UK 
forces.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   43 03/12/2014   12:48:26

44
JDP 01
244
NATO operations
2 .11. When the UK contributes to NATO crisis response, the process described in 
Section 4 (crisis response planning) is applied.  This ensures that the UK’s participation 
accords with the government’s intent and timely contributions are made to NATO 
planning.45
2.12. The MOD is responsible for liaising on strategic issues, both with NATO 
Headquarters (through the UK Military Representative and with Supreme Allied 
Commander Europe (SACEUR) located at Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe 
(SHAPE).  SHAPE also functions as Allied Command Operations (ACO).
2.13. The Defence Crisis Management Organisation (DCMO) will respond to, and 
proactively support, the NATO planning process.  DCMO will support the North 
Atlantic Council (NAC)46 early in its considerations, prior to issuing the activation 
warning and in such a way that the UK’s intended participation is made clear before 
NATO confirms its force generation plans.  A strategic planning group/current 
commitments team is likely to be the principal vehicle through which the UK 
contributes to NATO planning and responds to force preparation, transfer of authority 
and activation order instructions.  PJHQ is responsible for coordinating operational 
matters with SHAPE, the Allied Joint Force Commands47 and with deployed UK forces.
45  S ee AJP-5 and the COPD.
46  T he North Atlantic Council is the highest level of NATO decision-making.
47  N ATO has two headquarters at the operational-level of command – Joint Force Command Brunssum 
(The Netherlands) and Joint Force Command Naples (Italy).
© NATO
When the UK contributes to NATO operations, we follow their crisis response planning process
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   44 03/12/2014   12:48:26

45
JDP 0145
2
2.14. Command and control arrangements are specified in the concept of operations 
which will detail the conditions for transfer of authority from national to NATO 
command.48  SACEUR will normally delegate OPCON to an appointed JFC once the 
force is constituted.  In turn, SACEUR, may sub-delegate OPCON based on operational 
requirements.49
Multinational planning considerations
2.15. Doctrine.  Doctrine varies between nations, although the UK intent is to work 
within a recognised multinational planning framework wherever possible (the COPD) 
and employ NATO doctrine.  Even when common doctrine is used, there will be 
differences in interpretation and application.  Commanders and planning staff must 
ensure these differences are identified and addressed.
2.16. Influencing, and being influenced by, allies.  Staffs acting in multinational roles 
can be expected to represent their nations’ interests.
a. National interest.  UK commanders and staff should represent and 
promote the national interest, either as an explicit planning priority or objective 
or, more generally in shaping multinational intent.  They should expect other 
nations’ representatives to do the same.
b. Unique capabilities.  The UK may be asked to contribute unique capabilities 
or particular staff skills, which should be exploited fully.  Other nations will also 
possess capabilities that the UK may desire.
c. National caveats.  UK JFCs and staff should seek to develop trust and 
close working relationships with other national representatives.  While there is 
a tendency to adopt the norms and standards of a surrounding culture, they 
should always act within UK national guidelines.  It is preferable to be frank 
about national caveats or other reservations and to seek out areas where the 
UK’s positive contribution could benefit the multinational force.  If in doubt, UK 
JFCs and their staff should seek national guidance.
2 .17. Multinational cohesion.  Maintaining cohesion across the international 
community is a strategic priority in any multinational operation.  It builds and 
maintains operations authority and increases the likelihood of future force 
contributions.  Cohesion must be monitored as part of operations assessment and 
JFCs must devote significant time and effort to building and maintaining partnerships 
and trust.
48 Se e AJP-5.
49 Se e AJP-3.
Even when 
common 
doctrine is 
used, there 
will be 
differences in 
interpretation 
and application.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   45 03/12/2014   12:48:26

46
JDP 01
246
2.18. Multi-agency planning.  Within an integrated approach, commanding military 
forces does not necessarily confer command or control of the overall situation.50  
Where control is vested in another government department, JFCs should support 
coordinated planning with military advice and contribute to the collective execution 
of the overall mission.  They should also consider the impact of having to assume 
responsibility for some, or all, of the non-military lines of operation if the security or 
political situation precludes delivery by other agencies or authorities.  The resource 
implications of such a contingency may be significant and JFCs should be prepared to 
prioritise their efforts accordingly. 
2.19. Departmental processes and cultures.  Each department will have differing 
timelines, planning capacity, priorities, culture and approach to risk.  It should not be 
assumed that a military approach will be universally acceptable or understood and 
this may introduce frictions, misunderstandings and uncertainties.  Annex 2A outlines 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Department for International Development 
and Stabilisation Unit practices and culture.  In the early stages of an operation, 
where conditions are non- or semi-permissive, the military will often be the principal 
contributor.  When giving advice, commanders must use plain, jargon-free language 
and recognise that certain words can be laden with hidden meaning and values.  
Where command and control arrangements are unclear, commanders should be 
prepared to coordinate activity.
50  N ATO’s comprehensive approach to crisis management is addressed in AJP-01 Allied Joint Doctrine .
Section 3 – Multi-agency crisis management
Where control is vested in another government department, JFCs should support coordinated planning
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   46 03/12/2014   12:48:27

47
JDP 0147
2
Section 3 – Multi-agency crisis management
2.20. Multi-agency leadership.  An integrated response is most likely to succeed 
if a single figure, ideally formally empowered, orchestrates the activities of all the 
agencies involved.  How the role is agreed, and the formal authority that the leader is 
granted, varies on a case-by-case basis.  For UK national operations, an ambassador 
or political appointee, or a military commander, may be appropriate.  In multinational 
operations undertaken by the UN, the Special Representative of the Secretary General 
is likely to be appointed the leader.  On other occasions, particularly where there is no 
single nation or international organisation orchestrating events, other mechanisms 
may generate the required leadership.51
2.21. Across-government bodies.  Departmental coordination within the UK is 
enhanced through across-governmental bodies, often facilitated by the Cabinet 
Office, with both strategic and operational responsibilities.  These include:
•	 facilitating inter-departmental strategic planning to develop strategies and 
policies to deal with specific crises;52
•	 coordinating departmental contributions to the across-government strategy 
and monitoring national progress; and
•	 providing liaison and coordination for JFCs and other government 
departments in theatre.
2.22. Integrated planning at the operational level.  There is no universal template 
for collaborative planning between military and non-military organisations at the 
operational level.  The processes are dictated by the nature of the situation, the 
variety of actors and the extent of their involvement.  Figure 2.2 (on the next page) 
illustrates possible variations in inter-departmental collaboration, using three 
illustrative scenarios in which the military act: 
•	 alone (A);
•	 in loose cooperation with other government departments as part of a multi-
agency operation (B); or
•	 with close inter-agency collaboration under a unified across-government 
plan developed by the controlling department (C).
51  F or example, Lord Ashdown’s appointment as the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina – 
a position created under the Dayton Agreement.
52  A b ody of this type may develop national strategic objectives, having been given the national 
strategic aim by the Cabinet Office.
There is no 
universal 
template for 
collaborative 
planning 
between 
military and 
non-military 
organisations at 
the operational 
level. 
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   47 03/12/2014   12:48:27

48
JDP 01
248
While all three models envisage a single national strategy, military planning may be 
developed in relative isolation from other departments (A), or in coordination with 
them (B); or subordinate to an agreed across-government strategy (C).  
The integrated approach is best served by applying model C.
Figure 2.2 – Models of integrated planning at the operational level
2.23. International and non-governmental organisations.  The UK needs to 
coordinate and harmonise its military actions with those of other agencies, including 
international organisations, non-governmental organisations, donors and regional 
organisations.  The onset of operations usually acts as a catalyst for coordination 
under either loose, or more formalised, frameworks.  The UN Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA) normally establishes a humanitarian 
operations (or coordination) centre in any humanitarian crisis.  UN agencies and 
non-governmental organisations attend coordination meetings hosted by UN OCHA, 
A
Military
response
developed in
isolation.
B
Military response
developed in coordina tion
with civilian agen cies.
C
Military
FCO DFIDMilitary
FCO DFIDMilitary
Cross-governmen t
strategy
Legend
DFID D epa rtment for Internationa l Development
FCO Forei gn and Commonwealth Office
Cross-government strategy
developed first and ha s
preceden ce. Other plan s, including
the military response, suppo rts the
cross-government plan .
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   48 03/12/2014   12:48:27

49
JDP 0149
2
but there may be other non-governmental organisation forums where stakeholders 
address common issues and concerns.  
2.24. Humanitarian organisations.  Commanders must understand the different needs 
and perspectives of humanitarian organisations.  Each is likely to have a distinctive 
culture and unique aim, and some may not accept coordination  
with/by military forces (or even to be seen to cooperate with them).53  Each 
organisation should be treated separately, requiring an individual approach, and 
JFCs may need to adopt unfamiliar working practices to facilitate collaboration.  They 
should aim to create a broad dialogue, seek advice and benefit from the expertise and 
insights of different organisations.  Many organisations may have been in a particular 
operating environment for years and have unique and valuable experience.
2.25. Inter-agency collaboration.  There is no template by which JFCs may support an 
integrated approach.  Figure 2.3 offers three models.
a. Predominantly inter-agency.  Greatest collaboration is achieved where 
the majority of national and multinational partners work to an agreed strategic 
plan, ideally with an empowered leader.  Some agencies may remain unwilling 
or unable to operate in this way and aspects of inter-agency working remain 
challenging.
b. Multi-agency and inter-agency.  Unity of purpose is achieved through 
inter-agency working, where military and other government department 
staffs establish long-term collaborative practices.  Such arrangements may 
be self-established or prescribed.  This approach is enhanced by collocation.  
Multinationality, and the presence of international organisations and non-
governmental organisations, makes this approach more demanding and 
therefore, ideally requires common procedures to be adopted.
c. Multi-agency.  At the lowest level of collaboration, JFCs coordinate 
with other government departments, multinational partners, international 
organisations and non-governmental organisations.  In such circumstances, 
an integrated approach is enabled through civil-military cooperation, 
without establishing firm relationships.  This approach allows coordination 
or de-confliction, but does not enable a collaborative approach with agreed 
outcomes. 
53  I ndeed, Oslo Guidelines state that military forces should only be used in humanitarian assistance/
disaster relief as a last resort and where they bring a capability that cannot be provided by non-mil means 
in the timescale.  UN OCHA Oslo Guidelines Rev, 1.1 November 07.  (www.unocha.org )
Commanders 
must 
understand 
the different 
needs and 
perspectives of 
humanitarian 
organisations.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   49 03/12/2014   12:48:27

50
JDP 01
250
2.26. Private military and security companies. 54  At an early stage, JFCs should 
consider the impact of private military and security companies on their actions and 
operations.  Most of these companies are multinational and provide a range of armed 
and unarmed services.  This includes:
•	 risk management;
•	 governance and development activities;
•	 security provision;
•	 force and close protection; and 
54  T he term applies to all private military and security companies wherever they are registered or based, 
and to their local subcontractors.  It does not apply to Defence industry contractors, if their activity 
is regulated through existing export controls, an export licence has been issued, or the commercial 
proposals are wholly within the terms of that licence.  Additionally, unarmed contractors providing 
logistic support on operations to the MOD and covered by JSP 567.  Private security companies that 
operate solely in the UK domestic market are not classified as private military and security companies.
Predominantly inter-agency
Multinational leader theatre plan
IO/
NGO UK OGD UK JTFHQ Multinational
JTFHQ
Multinational
OGD
Multinational
OGD
Multinational
JTFHQUK JTFHQUK OGDIO/
NGO
Multi-agency and inter-agency 
Inter-agency 
Multinational
OGD
Multinational
JTFHQUK JTFHQUK OGDIO/
NGO
Multi-agency 
Multi-agency 
Legend
IO              International organisation
JTFH         Joint Task Force Headquarters
OGD     Other government department
NGO     Non-governmental organisation
Figure 2.3 – Models of inter-agency working at the operational level
Section 4 – UK Defence’s approach 
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   50 03/12/2014   12:48:27

51
JDP 0151
2
•	 military training to government, corporate and non-governmental 
organisation clients.  
JFCs should consider coordinating, or at least de-conflicting, their actions, with such 
companies.
2 . 27. Contractor support to operations.  This is an increasingly important element in 
the overall provision of support to operations.  It is addressed in JDP 4-00, Logistics for 
Joint Operations and AJP-3.13, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Deployment of Forces.
2.28. The Defence Crisis Management Organisation.  The MOD’s DCMO conducts 
three types of planning to support both national and multinational operations.
a. Crisis response planning determines, often at short notice, an appropriate 
military response to a current or imminent crisis.
b. Contingency planning is based on a mixture of intelligence and 
assumptions addressing how our Armed Forces might be involved in future 
crises.  This does not imply an endorsed intent by the government.  It may 
be impractical to gauge the likelihood of a contingency plan being enacted.  
However, where resources need to be expended to reduce or mitigate risk, the 
potential impact of a crisis must be assessed to inform prioritisation.
c. Current operations planning manages a current operation, prevents 
escalation and sustains military activity.  Such planning tends to follow crisis 
response planning, when military activity is (or is envisaged to be) prolonged.  
It may also involve elements of contingency planning to address potential 
changes in the situation, when we think we may be reaching a desired, or 
acceptable, outcome.
2.29. Crisis management groups.  Crises can impact across government, and a variety 
of task-organised, multifunctional groups monitor both potential and emerging 
crises.  These groups will plan and manage crisis response through to its end.      
Annex 2B describes the principal crisis management groups (with their detailed 
procedures being covered in DCMO standing operating procedures.
Section 4 – UK Defence’s approach 
 Contractor 
support is an 
increasingly 
important 
element in 
the overall 
provision of 
support to 
operations.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   51 03/12/2014   12:48:27

52
JDP 01
252
2.30. Planning context.  Figure 2.4 shows planning in an across-government context.  
It shows how actions contribute to effects that lead to achieving decisive conditions 
that support operations objectives.  These actions are undertaken by diplomatic and 
economic contributors, not just the military.  Actions by any contributor can have 
both anticipated and unanticipated effects on other contributors’ intended effects – 
few contributors exist in isolation.  
Figure 2.4 – Relationship between strategic and operational-level planning
Legend
 
 Achieved through military/joint force activity alone
 Achieved through civil-military cooperation
Strategic
planning
Operational-
level planning
National strategic aim
(NATO desired end-state)
National strategic objectives
(NATO strategic objectives)
Military strategic end-state
Military
strategic
objective
Military
strategic
objective
Military
strategic
objective
Operation end-state
Decisive
condition
Decisive
condition
Decisive
condition
Decisive
condition
Decisive
condition
Operational-level
objectives
Operational-level
objectives
Diplomatic
contribution
Economic
contribution
Subordinate/ tactical missions
Eﬀect Eﬀect Eﬀect Eﬀect Eﬀect
ActionsActionsActionsActions ActionsActions
Joint Force 
Commander’s
concept of 
operations
Actions Actions
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   52 03/12/2014   12:48:28

53
JDP 0153
2
2.31. NATO or coalition context.  When we operate in a NATO or coalition context, 
diplomatic and economic contributions will be planned and executed by all 
contributing nations.  Therefore, JFCs may have to contend with more than just 
other nations’ military actions.  As a coalition increases in diversity, the chances of 
unintended (negative or positive) consequences on others’ intended effects will 
increase.  Also in theatre will be multiple other actors whose actions and inactions 
may also impact on the JFC’s plan.  This complexity places great emphasis on the 
closest possible collaborative planning from the outset and from the highest levels 
downwards.55
Crisis response planning
2.32. Crisis response planning, summarised in Annex 2C, requires agility to cope 
with uncertainty, ambiguity and change.  Appendix 2C1 gives guidance on how the 
principal actors interact dynamically to produce the major planning outputs required.
2.33. Political-military estimate and political strategic analysis.  A crisis can arise, or 
change in nature or seriousness, at short notice.  Alternatively, a crisis may develop 
slowly, with time for a current operations group to form and deliberate (allowing 
contingency planning to occur).  In a NATO context, this period is addressed in  
Phase 1 of the NATO crisis management process.56  The MOD engages in across-
government political strategic analysis (see Chapter 1) to consider options for how the 
UK might respond  (a political decision, ultimately for the Prime Minister, the Cabinet 
and the National Security Council).  In the case of a rapidly emerging crisis, an early 
political-military estimate, conducted by a nominated strategic planning group, is 
used to identify possible (but as yet unformulated) desirable outcomes.  It will also 
evaluate potential military response options and associated risks, for consideration 
by the Director of Operations 57 and the CDS.  In a NATO context, planning will be 
initiated by a strategic warning order.  This will be initiated by direction from the 
North Atlantic Council SACEUR to conduct a strategic assessment.58 
2.34. Chief of Defence Staff’s planning directive.  Having conducted the political-
military estimate, and subject to the outcome of the political strategic analysis, the 
strategic planning group drafts CDS’ planning directive (see Chapter 1 and Annex 1A)  
to start the military-strategic estimate.  In the early stages, guidance to planners may 
be: 
•	 heavily-caveated; 
•	 based on multiple assumptions; and 
55 A JP-01 discusses NATO’s contribution to a comprehensive approach and acknowledges this 
complexity.
56  C OPD, Chapter 3, Phase 1 – Initial Situational Awareness of a Potential/Actual Crisis.
57  T he Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations) (DCDS(Mil Strat & Ops)).  
58  S ee COPD Chapter 3, Phase 2 – Strategic Assessment and Annex B, Appendix 2 – SACEUR’s Strategic 
Assessment template.
Actions by any 
contributor 
can have 
anticipated 
and 
unanticipated 
effects 
on other 
contributors.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   53 03/12/2014   12:48:28

54
JDP 01
254
•	 liable to change as circumstances and political choices mature.  
CDS’ intent, articulated within their planning directive, provides a unifying 
function for those engaged in concurrent, but potentially discrete, planning 
activities across the DCMO.  Planners may need to make assumptions to maintain 
planning momentum and confirm or update them as the situation evolves.  Broad 
environmental and functional contributions from the outset enable comprehensive 
and concurrent planning.  For PJHQ to progress the military-strategic estimate, a 
planning directive is issued as early as possible.  It provides: strategic direction59 
(either in draft or final form); assumptions and constraints;60 and planning direction.61  
In a NATO context, strategic assessment, followed by developing military response 
options,62 will result in SACEUR producing their strategic planning directive.  This 
forms part of the strategic plan development phase.63 
2.35. Military-strategic estimate.  On receiving CDS’ planning directive, a military-
strategic estimate is conducted by the PJHQ contingency planning team with the 
MOD’s Strategic Planning Group and Current Commitments Team.  Inputs to this 
process include: 
•	 CDS’ planning directive; 
•	 a summary of the political-military estimate; 
•	 outputs from across-government planning; and 
•	 the National Information Strategy.
In a NATO context, further inputs may include:
•	 the strategic and operational warning orders;
•	 SACEUR’s strategic assessment;
•	 draft military response options; 
•	 A North Atlantic Council Initiating Directive with Military Committee 
guidance; and
•	 SACEUR’s strategic planning directive.
59  S trategic direction includes; the national strategic aim; potential national strategic objectives; the 
military strategic end-state and/or military strategic objectives; the strategic narrative; information effect; 
CDS’ intent; and relevant extracts from the National Information Strategy.
60  A ssumptions and constraints are agreed with the FCO and DFID, and any relevant operating 
constraints and freedoms, to ensure that effort is not wasted in re-exploring discounted possibilities.
61  S uch as authority to deploy an operational liaison and reconnaissance team or, subject to operations 
security to engage with the Defence industrial base (see JDP 4-00).
62  S ee COPD Chapter 3, Phase 3 Military Response Option Development and Annex B Appendix 3 – 
Military Response Options template.
63  S ee COPD Chapter 3, Phase 4 Strategic Plan Development and Annex B Appendix 4 – Strategic 
Planning Directive template.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   54 03/12/2014   12:48:28

55
JDP 0155
2
2.36. Scope.  The military-strategic estimate scopes the feasibility of a military 
contribution to crisis response and evaluates options for submission to Ministers.  The 
military-strategic estimate:
•	 uses techniques such as illustrative operations planning, risk analysis and 
operational analysis64 to test options.
•	 provides a critical opportunity for military planners to indicate to political 
decision-makers how events might unfold, what forces may be required (and 
the opportunity costs involved in their committal), what casualties might 
result, financial costs, and prospects of success or failure.
•	 should be periodically revisited during operations, including during 
multinational operations where the UK may not have the lead in planning but 
may be able to exert influence based upon rigorous analysis.
A summary of the military-strategic estimate, briefed through the Chiefs of Staff 
Committee, is used by the Secretary of State and CDS to advise Cabinet on the 
practicality and implications, immediate and longer term, of a military contribution to 
any response.  Identifying and communicating strategic risk is an important element 
of the military-strategic estimate process.65
2 . 37. Chief of Defence Staff’s Operation’s Directive.  When the Prime Minister decides 
to commit military forces, CDS issues detailed direction by means of a CDS Operation’s 
Directive drafted by a current commitments team (see Chapter 1 and Annex 1B).  It 
includes three main elements.
a. Strategic direction comprising: national strategic aim; national strategic 
objectives; military strategic end-state and military strategic objectives; 
strategic narrative and information effect; CDS’ intent; and any constraints at the 
operational level.
b. Force composition and conduct which identifies the elements of the 
joint force, designates the theatre of operations, and provides guidance on 
anticipated duration, sustainability and any legal issues including rules of 
engagement.  The operations directive may also outline strategic risks identified 
by the military strategic headquarters, and any threats or opportunities these 
may present at the operational level. 
64 Se e AJP-5.
65  R isk is addressed in AJP-01. 
The military 
strategic 
estimate 
scopes the 
feasibility of 
a military 
contribution 
to crisis 
response and 
evaluates 
options.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   55 03/12/2014   12:48:28

56
JDP 01
256
c. Command and control issues including: 
•	 command appointments; 
•	 command relationships; 
•	 guidance on coordination with all parties;66 and
•	 command and control arrangements.
CDS may issue an Operation’s Directive (either draft or initial) on a limited distribution 
before all information is available and may also delegate the development of certain 
sections, such as coordinating instructions.  
2.38. Joint Commander’s mission directive.  CDS will nominate a Joint Commander; 
this is normally the Chief of Joint Operations (CJO).  The Joint Commander, with 
authority from CDS planning and operations directives, issues a Joint Commander’s 
Directive to empower JFCs and direct the enabling functions of deploy, sustain and 
recover.  Annex 2D is representative of such a directive.
2.39. Collaborative planning.  Crisis planning takes place collaboratively between 
the MOD, CJO, PJHQ and the assigned JFC.  Liaison officers should be exchanged 
between JFCs, planning entities, contributing components, the Stabilisation Unit and 
other government departments who have been involved in planning. 67
2.40. Planning the deployment.  Planning for deploying the force, including 
headquarters and augmentees, should begin at the earliest opportunity.  This enables 
JFCs to:
•	 identify any constraints;
•	 establish the broad deployment timeline;
•	 meet the lead times for chartering aircraft and ships; and
•	 conduct wider engagement with industry.
Deployment planning should remain covert until an announcement has been 
made to commit forces, and must always be subject to operations security.  PJHQ 
orchestrates force deployment, although the JFC’s headquarters will shape much of 
the planning to ensure that it meets the JFC’s intent.
2.41. Planning the military operation.  Operations planning in support of any 
integrated across-government or multinational planning may be completed before 
deployment planning begins, but they frequently overlap (catered for by JFHQ 
66 I ncluding: the single-Services, Joint Forces Commander, Director Special Forces (DSF) and Chief of 
Defence Materiel (CDM), allies, other government departments, host nations, international organisations 
and non-governmental organisations.
67  S ee COPD Chapter 4, Phase 3 Operational Estimate and Phase 4 Operational Plan Development.  
Crisis planning 
takes place 
collaboratively 
between 
the MOD, CJO, 
PJHQ and the 
assigned JFC. 
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   56 03/12/2014   12:48:28

57
JDP 0157
2
participation in PJHQ’s contingency planning team and the establishment of a 
situational awareness group).  A planning sequence is described below.
a. From the outset, JFHQ staff branches are represented on PJHQ’s 
contingency planning team.  This keeps JFCs informed on progress and they will 
also represent the JFC’s views at the strategic/operational interface.  JFCs will 
begin to formulate their plans in parallel with the contingency planning team, 
and they may issue a warning order.
b. JFCs and/or members of their staff may conduct a reconnaissance to 
theatre, normally as part of an operational liaison reconnaissance team.  The 
Joint Commander should outline the aim of such reconnaissance and any 
constraints, such as duration, limits on movement and liaison authority.  The 
exact nature, size and duration of the reconnaissance party may vary, but it 
should include allies or coalition partners, potential host nations and other 
government departments.
c. JFCs undertake operational-level planning in collaboration with 
subordinate commanders, other government departments, international 
organisations, non-governmental organisation representatives and coalition 
partners.  To ensure that the most recent information and assumptions are 
available to all planning teams, there should be a continuous exchange of 
information between strategic, operational and tactical headquarters.
JFC must engage early with our industry partners among others
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   57 03/12/2014   12:48:29

58
JDP 01
258
2.42. Relationship with the operational liaison and reconnaissance team.  A deployed 
operational liaison reconnaissance team may satisfy information and intelligence 
requirements emerging from both the military-strategic estimate and the operational 
estimate.  It may also generate new issues for clarification up the chain-of-command.  
An operational liaison reconnaissance team may remain in place and form the core of 
the JFC’s deployed headquarters.
Contingency planning
2.43. Contingency planning addresses potential military involvement in future crises 
(see Appendix 2C1).  The Strategic Regional Implementation Group for Defence 
Engagement (STRIDE) highlights intelligence collection requirements and areas 
of potential instability that are likely to affect UK interests.  To reduce the time 
taken to produce detailed plans in the event of a crisis, CDS directs CJO to develop 
contingency plans in the form of generic joint planning guides and more specific joint 
contingency plans. 
2.44. Joint planning guides comprise generic planning data for a country, region or 
theatre, or for the military contribution to a particular type of operation, such as a 
non-combatant evacuation operation or a disaster relief operation.  MOD, PJHQ, the 
single-Service Chiefs, Joint Forces Command or other government departments may 
identify a need for a joint planning guide; this requires CJO approval.  If approved, the 
following steps are taken.
•	 CJO instructs PJHQ J5 to compile the planning guide, outlining the planning 
parameters, likely objectives, timelines and any political or military 
constraints.
•	 PJHQ will form a contingency planning team who identify any other 
government department or Stabilisation Unit plans for that area.
•	 A reconnaissance may be conducted with the British military representative, 
or military intelligence liaison officer, and any other government department 
representatives in theatre.  Joint planning guide reconnaissance is normally 
carried out discreetly by a small team.
•	 Once the reconnaissance is finished, the contingency planning team 
circulates a draft joint planning guide for comment by other government 
departments, proposed supporting commands, and relevant Embassies/High 
Commissions via the Consular Division of the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office.  
The 
operational-
level planning 
process and 
associated 
formats are in 
the COPD.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   58 03/12/2014   12:48:29

59
JDP 0159
2
•	 Once all comments have been incorporated, and the joint planning guide has 
been approved by CJO, it is maintained by PJHQ.
2.45. Joint contingency plans detail the military capabilities needed to conduct 
specified operations and deployment options, and include readiness states and 
associated risks.  The requirement for a joint contingency plan may be identified by 
MOD, PJHQ, the single-Service Chiefs or the Joint Forces Command, but is initiated 
by a CDS planning directive.  Deputy Chief of Defence Staff (Military Strategy and 
Operations) (DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)) orders the formation of a strategic planning 
group to conduct a political-military estimate, engage with other government 
departments, and draft CDS’ planning directive (see Annex 1A).  Once PJHQ receives 
the directive, a contingency planning team is formed, in concert with the MOD, 
supporting commands and other specialist staffs including other government 
departments.  The contingency planning team undertakes a military-strategic 
estimate, may conduct a reconnaissance, and drafts the joint contingency plan.  
Depending on the intended operation, the final joint contingency plans may be 
submitted to the Commander Joint Forces Command and single-Service Chiefs of 
Staff for approval or, via CDS and the Secretary of State, to the Cabinet.  The joint 
contingency plan is issued and maintained by PJHQ.
2.46. Indicators and warnings.  Implicit within contingency planning is the need to 
develop indicators and warnings.  These comprise key events or signs which alert 
planners to an imminent crisis.  Indicators and warnings should be selected that 
provide sufficient notice to activate contingency plans or, if necessary, develop new 
plans in time to pre-empt, rather than react to, an emerging situation.  The Cabinet 
Office’s six-monthly review of the Countries at Risk of Instability forms the basis 
of indicators and warnings assessments.  Within the MOD, Defence Intelligence is 
responsible for monitoring indicators and warnings and for linking into other security 
organisations such as NATO.
Current operations planning
2.47. Operations may be short or continue for years.  They may be continuous or 
intermittent; the military contribution may fluctuate in importance compared with 
that of the other instruments of power.  Irrespective of length, intensity or character, 
the organisations and processes outlined above provide an adaptive framework for 
planning and managing operations.
Contingency 
planning 
addresses 
potential 
military 
involvement 
in future crises.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   59 03/12/2014   12:48:29

60
JDP 01
260
2.48. Doctrine for conducting operations (management rather than design) is covered 
in JDP 3-00, Campaign Execution68 and AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of 
Operations.  There are two aspects that are particularly relevant: 
•	 operations review is relevant because it requires commanders and 
headquarters at all levels (as well as non-military actors) to communicate, 
interact and understand each other.  
•	 termination and transition is relevant because it involves an aspect of 
operations, with potentially strategic implications, that requires extensive 
planning beyond the operational level.
2.49. Operations review.  DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops) is responsible to CDS for monitoring 
current operations and keeping ongoing operations under strategic review.  The 
DCMO, through operations planning and management processes, provides the 
information necessary to validate objectives, confirm or modify plans for achieving 
them, and adjusting capability and resource allocations accordingly.  This continual 
review process, illustrated at Appendix 2C1, takes place at different stages.
a. At the national strategic level, the government’s political strategic analysis, 
the consequent across-government strategy or plan, and associated national 
strategic aim and objectives are periodically reviewed through policy, strategy 
and senior officials’ groups.  Regular revisions to political-military estimates feed 
this review process.  Any re-appraisal of the government’s intended role for the 
military, informed by such review, may result in new direction being issued and 
a need to review the military-strategic estimate.
b. At the military strategic level, the output of across-government review, 
ongoing monitoring (by the Chiefs of Staff), and assessments of risk and 
opportunity (from the Joint Commander at PJHQ and the JFC in theatre) all 
inform the overall assessment of current and projected progress towards 
achieving military strategic objectives.  This process can be called a strategic 
review – the form and conduct of which varies from one operation to another.  
It may result in a review of the extant CDS operations directive, and/or a force 
level review to confirm or adjust the balance of forces between commitments.  
Where the situation is judged to have changed significantly, or political intent to 
have altered, a strategic planning group may be needed to refresh or conduct a 
further political-military estimate and a revised military strategic estimate.
68  A s part of the ongoing plan to adopt NATO doctrine ,JDP 3-00 will be withdrawn when AJP-3 is 
revised. 
Operations 
should be 
reviewed as 
a continual 
process.
”
“
Section 5 – Operations led by the EU, US and UN 
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   60 03/12/2014   12:48:29

61
JDP 0161
2
c. At the operational level, CJO and deployed JFCs will keep ongoing 
operations under review, using assessment,69 risk analysis and periodic stock-
takes.
2.50. Termination and transition.  Termination and transition operations are complex.  
They can feature periods of significant strategic and operational-level risk and both 
have to be factored into planning from the outset.  Planning issues include:70
•	 pre-empting the end of hostilities with contingency plans to undertake 
essential post-conflict activities;
•	 ensuring forces withdraw in good order;
•	 making adequate provision for force roulement and any necessary changes in 
presence, posture and profile;
•	 switching weights of effort to different types of military activity as the nature 
of an operation changes over time;71 and
•	 planning to ensure enduring security (which may necessitate forces in 
overwatch) and transition from military to civil primacy requiring civil-military 
collaboration.
European Union operations
2.51. The European Union (EU) planning process is described in Annex 2E.  In EU-led 
operations, the EU’s permanent military elements – the European Union Military 
Committee and the European Union Military Staff (EUMS) – provide the principal 
coordination points for the UK MOD.  During the early stages of a crisis, the DCMO 
functions as normal in its national capacity.  EU crisis management procedures 
envisage the EUMS drawing upon planning expertise from either EU member states 
and/or NATO (under the Berlin Plus agreement72) as the crisis unfolds.  For the UK, 
this expertise is provided by the MOD and PJHQ’s links with the European Union 
Military Committee mirror those with NATO’s Military Committee; the UK military 
69 Se e JDP3-00 and AJP-3.
70  A t the time of publishing, further detail of the planning issues were covered in AJP-01(E), (study draft)
and AJP-3.4.5 Building Stability  (study draft). 
71  F or example, ensuring military/defence support to ongoing stabilisation efforts.
72  T he NATO, Berlin Plus agreement, 21 June 2006 includes the exchange of classified information and 
access to NATO assets and capabilities, 
Termination 
and transition 
operations are 
complex.
”
“
Section 5 – Operations led by the EU, US and UN 
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   61 03/12/2014   12:48:29

62
JDP 01
262
representative attends both.  DCMO activity will focus on the UK’s contribution to 
any proposed EU response, while maintaining oversight of any additional planning 
support likely to be required by the EUMS.  
2.52. The EU has three models for operational headquarters, described in Annex 2E.  
UK planning implications are outlined below.
a. EU-led operations with recourse to NATO assets.  If the EU requests NATO 
support, the relationship between the DCMO and the EU would be comparable 
to the NATO model.  NATO’s Combined Joint Planning Staff (in ACO – J5) would 
provide planning support at the request of the EU.  Deputy SACEUR (a UK 
4* appointment) would be the likely choice to fulfil the functions normally 
performed by SACEUR, as the Military Strategic Commander, for NATO-led 
operations.  The dual-hatted UK military representative is the link with both 
NATO Headquarters and the EU.
b. EU-led operation without recourse to NATO assets.  If NATO assets are 
not employed, a nation will act as a framework nation using one of the five 
designated operational headquarters.73  If PJHQ is selected as the operational 
headquarters, specific EU multinational headquarters procedures are activated.  
If another operational headquarters was chosen, some PJHQ staff and extra 
augmentees would deploy there.  Augmentees could include: 
•	 key nucleus staff pre-nominated and trained, drawn mainly from PJHQ/
JFHQ, and immediately available for the EU role;
•	 primary augmentee multinational staff, pre-nominated and trained, 
including civilian/military staff from the EUMS and other EU nations;
•	 primary augmentee parent nation staff nominated and trained staff from 
other UK headquarters to augment the multinational headquarters; and 
•	 additional augmentee multinational staff, not pre-nominated, to be 
made available if required.
c. EU operations centre.  The EUMS maintain the capability to form an 
operation headquarters.74  PJHQ may contribute personnel on request.
73  L ocated in the UK (PJHQ), France, Germany, Italy and Greece.
74  P articularly where there is a civil/military aspect or where no national headquarters has been 
identified – EU Principles for EU Headquarters, agreed by the European Union Military Committee, 2 June 
2005.
The EU 
has three 
models for 
operational 
headquarters.
”
“
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   62 03/12/2014   12:48:29

63
JDP 0163
2
2.53. If the UK is the framework nation, the decision on who to appoint as operational 
commander should consider CJO’s role in other operations, the availability of 
alternative commanders (possibly drawn from the joint command group) and the 
staff required to support a UK national contingent.  The roles and tasks of CJO and the 
PJHQ may split along EU and national lines.  CJO may act as: 
•	 operational commander and joint commander; or
•	 operational commander (with CDS selecting another joint commander); or
•	 joint commander (with CDS selecting another operational commander).
2.54. When the UK provides the JFHQ as the core element of the EU force 
headquarters, the designated force commander is subordinated to EU operational 
command.  When the force commander is not from the UK, a separate national 
contingent commander is the link to PJHQ.  Where the UK provides the operation 
headquarters, then it is responsible for providing communications to the force 
headquarters.  Where JFHQ provides the framework of an EU force headquarters, it is 
responsible for providing communications down to subordinate commands.
The UK may be called to support EU-led operations overseas
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   63 03/12/2014   12:48:30

64
JDP 01
264
United States-led operations
2.55. The UK often operates within a US-led coalition.  The US command and planning 
doctrine is detailed in US Joint Publication (JP)-1, Doctrine for the Armed Forces of the 
United States, and JP-5, Joint Operation Planning.75  It differs from that of the UK and 
NATO.  The US President is the Commander-in-Chief of all US forces, assisted by the 
Secretary of Defense.  The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff advises them but 
does not enjoy a separate level of command equivalent to the UK MOD.  Instead,  
combatant commanders have a direct link to the US President through the Secretary 
pf Defense.
2.56. Within a US-led coalition, the MOD and the DCMO remain the focus for national 
planning, linked through the British Defence Staff United States and the US Joint 
Staffs, with PJHQ deploying a small staff to liaise with the combatant commander.  A 
senior British military adviser or national contingent commander is likely to deploy to 
assist the combatant commander in developing options for any UK involvement.76 
United Nations and other multinational operations
2 . 57. UN operations.  The UN’s role and organisation is described in Joint Warfare 
Publication 3-50, The Military Contribution to Peace Support Operations.77  UN 
operations may be mounted by a single nation or on a multinational basis as a 
coalition/alliance.  Command and control structures vary depending on the nature 
and scale of operations, but the UN normally forms a theatre/force headquarters from 
among the contributing nations.78  
75  U S unclassified doctrine is available at: http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs
76  P JHQ and the Senior British Military Adviser/National Contingent Commander should coordinate 
closely to ensure that the US combatant commander receives coherent UK advice.
77  A llied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.4.1(A), Allied Joint Doctrine for Peace Support Operations is being 
developed.
78  S ubordinate to, but often within, the predominantly civilian mission headquarters.
US planning 
doctrine 
differs from 
that of the UK 
and NATO.
”
“
The UK may contribute to UN operations on its own, or part of a coalition/alliance
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   64 03/12/2014   12:48:31

65
JDP 0165
2
2.58. For operations conducted under a UN mandate, the military force commander 
acts in support of the civilian Head of Mission, normally a Special Representative of 
the Secretary General (although in simple operations, the force commander may be 
appointed Head of Mission).  The Head of Mission’s planning staff is responsible for 
developing coordinating plans that reflect international consensus.  These plans must 
be continually reviewed against mission objectives and the changing situation on the 
ground.
2.59. Cooperative operations.  UK forces may deploy on a national basis alongside 
other national contingents, who then agree to de-conflict or cooperate outside the 
framework of a recognised multinational command structure.79  The most likely 
bilateral cooperative operation is the UK-French Combined Joint Expeditionary 
Force (CJEF) concept.80  These cooperative operations are most likely to occur during 
non-combatant evacuation operations, peacekeeping and limited intervention.  
Although there may be joint objectives, it is likely that each nation also has individual 
national imperatives, objectives and responsibilities.  UK involvement in cooperative 
operations demands the appointment of a JFC, with a joint task force headquarters to 
conduct in-theatre liaison between national forces.
79  T his could be in accordance with extant memoranda of understanding or status of forces agreements.
80  S ee UK-French Combined Joint Expeditionary Force (CJEF) User Guide available through the Defence 
Intranet. 
Command and control structures on multinational operations vary depending on the nature and  
scale of operations
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   65 03/12/2014   12:48:31

66
JDP 01
266
 
•	 The operational level is: the level of 
operations at which campaigns and 
major operations are planned, conducted 
and sustained to accomplish strategic 
objectives within theatres or areas of 
operations.
•	 Understanding is crucial; it provides 
insight and foresight on what can, and 
cannot, be influenced, and where the 
boundaries lie. 
•	 Military actions (to realise specific effects 
and subsequently attain objectives) 
are frequently inter-woven with the 
actions, intended effects, and associated 
objectives of other non-military actors.
•	 Operations planning links intent at the 
strategic level and action at the tactical 
level. 
•	 Multinational operations are normally 
facilitated by selecting a lead or 
framework nation, in many cases 
under the mandate of the UN or other 
recognised international organisation.
•	 The UK intent is to work within a 
recognised multinational planning 
framework wherever possible and employ 
NATO doctrine.
•	 Commanders must use plain, jargon-
free language and recognise that certain 
words can be laden with hidden meaning 
and values. 
 
•	 Commanders must understand the 
different needs and perspectives of 
humanitarian organisations.  Many 
organisations may have been in a 
particular operating environment for years 
and have unique and valuable experience.
•	 When we operate in a NATO or coalition 
context, diplomatic and economic 
contributions will be planned and 
executed by all contributing nations.  
Therefore, JFCs may have to contend with 
more than just other nations’ military 
actions.  
•	 The military strategic estimate scopes 
the feasibility of a military contribution to 
crisis response and evaluates options for 
submission to Ministers. 
•	 Operations planning in support of 
any integrated cross-government or 
multinational planning may be completed 
before deployment planning begins, but 
they frequently overlap.
•	 JFCs undertake operational-level planning 
in collaboration with subordinate 
commanders, other government 
departments, international organisations, 
non-governmental organisation 
representatives and coalition partners. 
•	 Doctrine for conducting operations 
(management rather than design) is 
covered in JDP 3-00, Campaign Execution 
and AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the 
Conduct of Operations. 
This Annex is a guide on cross-government crisis planning
Key points
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   66 03/12/2014   12:48:31

67
JDP 0167
2
2A.1. Understanding other departments.  A guiding principle of an integrated 
approach is that institutional familiarity will enhance collaborative working and 
trust.  Just as doctrinal knowledge enhances our conduct of multinational operations, 
understanding other government departments enhances cooperation and planning.  
This principle has equal applicability when operating with international organisations 
and non-governmental organisations.
2A.2. Lead government department.  Lead government departments’ 
responsibilities for planning, response and recovery from emergencies are addressed 
in the ‘gov.uk’ website.81  In addition, the Department for International Development 
(DFID) leads on disasters overseas,82 and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) 
leads non-combatant evacuations.83 
2A.3. Variance in approach.  Each of the principal government departments involved 
in crisis planning in the context of conflict (FCO, DFID and the MOD), with the 
interdepartmental Stabilisation Unit facilitating these processes, has a unique way of 
doing business.  Generally, differences may be caused by several factors.
a. Size and structure.  The FCO and DFID are smaller than the MOD and have 
different structures.
b. Culture.  The military culture, based on authority and discipline, is 
often directive.  Civilian practice, however, often needs to be consultative, 
democratic and less hierarchical.
c. Crises orientation.  We have traditionally been resourced, prepared and 
trained as a contingency against future crises which, when they occur, usually 
attract further funding from the Treasury.  Conversely, other government 
81  S ee The Lead Government Department and its Role – Guidance and Best Practice.
82  S ee JDP 3-52, Disaster Relief Operations .
83  S ee JDP 3-51, Non-combatant Evacuation Operations .
Annex 2A – Planning 
with other government 
departments
This Annex is a guide on cross-government crisis planning
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   67 03/12/2014   12:48:31

68
JDP 01
268
departments tend to view crises as a continuum of ongoing, day-to-day 
business that they manage within existing funds.
d. Planning approaches.  Due to the characteristics of military crisis response, 
and the planning resources available, we use a formal approach to planning.  
Some other government departments follow broadly similar lines.  However, 
in certain situations, more fluid models are appropriate, to allow flexibility 
according to the political nature of the situation.  The approach to policy-
setting and decision-making may be progressive and iterative.
e. Risk appetite.  Military operations involve risk, including that to life.  While 
other departments can, and do, work in hazardous locations, they may 
withdraw their personnel if they judge the situation to be too dangerous.
2A.4. Understanding ourselves.  Military planners engaged in multi-agency 
operations should recognise that military practice can appear alien to civilian 
partners.  While other departments recognise the military’s competence, they often 
have difficulty recognising where and how they can engage effectively.  Military 
processes are sometimes seen by other government departments as cumbersome, 
labour-intensive and introspective.  In particular, civilian planners often cite the 
sense of ‘unstoppable momentum’ that characterises the military response to a new 
crisis.  This, while a key characteristic of our ‘can do’ spirit, may not be conducive to 
influence by other government department representatives.  Military liaison officers 
and embedded personnel in other government departments play an important 
role in enabling successful planning.  They can identify the correct interface points 
and enhance mutual understanding, as well as permanently represent their own 
commanders’ position.  The value of effective liaison is stressed throughout the Allied 
Command Operations Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive.
Department for International Development
2A.5. Purpose.  DFID’s primary focus is poverty reduction, including working 
towards achieving the UN’s Millennium Goals for poverty reduction, which is reflected 
in the Department’s objectives and targets.  The UK, along with most western 
countries, is a signatory of the Paris Declaration.  This calls on donor nations to work 
with the governments of states in crisis, as partners, in developing poverty-reducing 
strategies.  DFID will always seek to draw representatives of afflicted states into its 
planning processes.  To deliver sustainable development, DFID must work with other 
donor nations, international organisations, non-governmental organisations and the 
agencies of the crisis state, to ensure a coherent international development effort.  
Consequently, DFID gives priority to working with such partners.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   68 03/12/2014   12:48:31

69
JDP 0169
2
2A.6. Processes.  DFID has developed specific analysis and planning methodologies.  
Analysis is often conducted by in-country DFID offices which tend to have greater 
devolved power than other departments’ deployed representatives:
2 A .7. Country assistance plan.  A country assistance plan (CAP) is compulsory for 
all countries or regions where DFID works (where a threshold of £20M of funding 
has been reached), and considerable weight is placed upon gaining a detailed 
understanding of the situation before the plan is written.  A number of assessment 
tools have been developed to help achieve this, some of which – including the 
‘country governance assessment’ and ‘fiduciary risk assessment’ – are compulsory.  
Others, such as the ‘strategic conflict assessment’ and ‘drivers of change’ assessments, 
will only be done where and when needed.  Country assistance plans should provide 
a long-term strategy and are usually reviewed every three years.
2A.8. Logical framework analysis.  Once developed, country assistance plans could 
be broken down further into separate sectors, for example education, health or 
governance and addressed through a collection of programmes and projects.  An 
important tool when developing these projects is ‘logical framework analysis’ or 
‘logframe’.  This should lay out the hierarchy of objectives within the project, identify 
key assumptions, state means of objective verification, and highlight any indicators of 
progress, thereby capturing the logic in the plan.
Foreign and Commonwealth Office
2A.9. Purpose.  The UK’s foreign policy objectives are articulated as departmental 
strategic objectives, including four policy goals, in those areas where the FCO leads 
the UK’s international engagement.  The policy goals cover:
•	 countering terrorism and weapons proliferation;
•	 preventing and resolving conflict;
•	 promoting a low carbon, high-growth global economy; and 
•	 supporting the development of international institutions.
2A.10. Diplomacy.  The FCO is not resourced for significant crisis response.  Instead, 
it considers each situation within the context of an ongoing dynamic of international 
diplomatic relations.  As a result, the FCO tends to focus on immediate issues, in what 
is frequently a rapidly changing situation.
a. With the exception of the crisis management plans held by diplomatic 
posts,84 detailed contingency plans are of limited use to the FCO as they 
can very quickly become out-of-date and may restrict future flexibility.  
84  D escribed in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-51, Non-combatant Evacuation Operations .
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   69 03/12/2014   12:48:31

70
JDP 01
270
Furthermore, diplomacy tools tend to involve the fostering and subsequently 
exploiting personal relationships.  Diplomacy, therefore, is a far more 
individual process than the task-oriented activities carried out by either DFID 
or the MOD, requiring few formal strategies and plans.
b. It is usual to find the UK’s diplomatic position articulated within ‘lines 
to take’, Ministerial briefing papers, policy statements and ‘e-grams’ from 
ambassadors.  These are usually the outcome of intense dialogue between 
regional desks, policy departments, UK missions (to the UN or EU), and 
embassy staffs, as well as with appropriate other government departments.  
This results in an agreed view that is then taken forward by FCO staff in 
Whitehall and the network of embassies, high commissions and other 
diplomatic posts overseas.
Stabilisation Unit
2 A .11. Purpose.  The Stabilisation Unit was established in 2004 as a tri-departmental 
unit of the MOD, FCO and DFID.  The Stabilisation Unit’s aim is to deliver integrated 
conflict prevention and stabilisation expertise for fragile and conflict-affected 
states, in support of the Government’s objectives.  The Stabilisation Unit works in 
partnership with ‘parent’ government departments and has a deployable capability 
comprising civil servants and civilian experts.
2A.12. Objectives.  The Stabilisation Unit has seven objectives.  They are to:
•	 coordinate and oversee the delivery of stabilisation activity in priority 
regions;
•	 provide expertise on stabilisation and conflict, sharing lessons to inform 
the Government’s policy and practice;
•	 provide effective security and justice advice and support (including 
policing) to fragile and conflict-affected states;
•	 maximise the contribution of UK policing capabilities in support of the 
Building Stability Overseas Strategy objectives;
•	 safely deliver the right people to the right place at the right time and 
deliver a new UK team of experts dedicated to combating and preventing 
sexual violence in conflict, in support of the wider FCO initiative; 
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   70 03/12/2014   12:48:31

71
JDP 0171
2
•	 increase the support to, and understanding of, stabilisation, including 
promoting the role of the Stabilisation Unit and the importance of the 
integrated approach; and 
•	 successfully implement the changes to the Stabilisation Unit resulting from 
the 2012 review.
2A.13. Processes.  The Stabilisation Unit supports across-government analysis of the 
drivers of conflict and sources of stability in conflict states, known as the joint analysis 
of conflict and stability.  The Stabilisation Unit also facilitates an integrated approach 
to strategic planning for conflict and stability.  There is inter-departmental guidance 
that covers joint analysis and the integrated planning process.  Analysis and planning 
for particular contexts are formally commissioned by the National Security Council, 
the Building Stability Overseas Board or other senior officials.
2A.14. Joint analysis of conflict and stability.  The joint analysis of conflict and 
stability approach can be used in active conflicts, and in situations that are fragile, 
but currently peaceful.  The process can be light-touch or in-depth, depending on the 
available timescales and customer needs, and is focussed at the strategic level.  The 
approach is based on three phases.
a. Phase 1.  Phase 1 reviews what is already known, establishes objectives, 
and agrees the timing and the scope of the study.  The focus is on drawing in 
all relevant parts of the Government to agree on key questions and map out 
existing UK interests and priorities.
b. Phase 2.  Phase 2 requires detailed analysis responding to the objectives 
set out in Phase 1.  A governmental team carries out desk and field studies, 
examining drivers, actors and dynamics in conflict, and sources of resilience 
and other opportunities for peace.  The team provide a set of detailed 
conclusions and recommendations for further consideration by the 
Government.
c. Phase 3.  Phase 3 focuses on using analyses.  It aims to ensure that the 
findings of analysis inform subsequent UK policy and action.  
2A.15. Integrated planning.  Ideally the goal in any conflict-affected environment is 
to achieve an inclusive political settlement that creates the conditions for sustainable 
peace.  Integrated planning (illustrated in Figure 2A.1) helps the Government think 
through its priorities, level of ambition, how best to engage in a given country and 
ensures value for money (economy, efficiency and effectiveness).   Planners should:
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   71 03/12/2014   12:48:32

72
JDP 01
272
•	 identify whether there is a UK interest and an intention to engage;
•	 clarify governance and coordination roles for the UK inter-departmental 
team early on through written terms of reference;
•	 ensure that there is a shared understanding across government 
departments of objectives and key drivers;
•	 consult closely with people in theatre;
•	 understand the plans and intentions of local actors;
•	 identify whether or not assistance is welcomed by the state, and whether 
or not the operating environment is permissive;
•	 identify key stakeholders in the international effort, the extent of their 
authority or influence, and whether one state or multinational body is 
positioning itself to lead;
•	 establish the legal boundaries around any intervention;
•	 decide on options for activity on the basis of consensus, after fully 
considering the range of options (if there is no consensus, planners should 
refer to the National Security Council (Officials) or delegated authority);
•	 secure Ministerial and/or senior level support;
•	 establish baseline measures and an integrated monitoring and evaluation 
framework from the outset; and
•	 implement agreed activity.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   72 03/12/2014   12:48:32

73
JDP 0173
2
1) Initiate
Agree 
HMG strategic 
aim at NSC
Form core 
group 
(CO/FCO/
 MOD/DFID/
SU)
Secure
international
buy-in
Set 
objectives 
and exit 
conditions
Agree
joint
analysis
Conduct
scenario
planning
Is there a 
reasonable 
chance of 
success?
Revisit 
planning at 
intervals
Deployyes
no
2) Deploy
Send HRT/
OLRT/RDT as 
required
Evacuate
UK
nationals
Scope 
further 
support?
yes Send SRT
Revisit 
planning at 
intervals
Exit when 
conditions 
met
no
3) Implement
Form
transition
team
Assist with 
transition
Monitor and 
evaluate
Legend
CO Cabinet Oﬃce
DFID Department for International Development
FCO Foreign and Commonwealth Oﬃce
HMG Her Majesty’ s Government
HRT  Humanitarian Response Team (DFID)
MOD Ministry of Defence
NSC National Security Council
OLRT  Operational Liaison and 
 Reconnaissance Team (MOD)
RDT  Rapid Deployment Team (FCO)
SRT  Stabilisation Response Team (SU)
SU  Stabilisation Unit 
Figure 2A.1 – An integrated approach to strategic planning for conflict and stability
2A.16. Initiation.  Any department may initiate integrated planning – and planning 
is an iterative process.  Following any rapid-onset crisis, the Government’s leadership 
will be provided at the highest level by the Prime Minister and the National Security 
Council (NSC).  National Security Council (Officials) is the Permanent Secretary-level 
group that supports the NSC.  It will provide the steering group that agrees the aim, 
objectives and associated owners of the integrated plan, as well as the exit conditions.  
Below this there will be a core group of working-level officials.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   73 03/12/2014   12:48:32

74
JDP 01
274
2 A .17. Deployment.  The types of teams that deploy, and the timing of the 
deployment, will depend on the assessment of the crisis.  Planning can be done on 
a contingency basis, rather than leading inevitably to action.  It may also be the case 
that, during the planning process, Ministers and officials conclude that there is no 
reasonable chance of success.  Plans will therefore need to be revisited at appropriate 
intervals.  If teams are to deploy, then one of the key early considerations will be 
whether or not there is a consular crisis and a need to evacuate UK nationals.  Another 
consideration will be the nature, relevance and accuracy of the information that 
already exists, and whether further scoping is essential to make informed decisions 
about activity in the local context.
2A.18. Implementation.  Successfully implementing a plan will depend on clear 
and open lines of communication.  Figure 2A.2 is for illustrative purposes and must 
be adapted to the specific context, depending on the scale of the intervention and 
whether or not there is a major UK military deployment.  Activity will continue until 
Ministers and officials are satisfied that exit conditions have been met.
International
level
Whitehall
level
Country
level
Sub-national
level
Coalition
Steering Group
SRO
Core Group
Embassy
DFID
oﬃce
Stabilisation
Response Team
Military
Reconstruction Team 
or specialist advisers
Legend
SRO      Senior reporting oﬃcer
DFID    Department for International Development
SRO
Figure 2A.2 – Implementation
Where footnoted, the material has been extracted from the online version of How Defence 
Works – The New Operating Model.  This is the single, authoritative, web-based source of 
information on how Defence works.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   74 03/12/2014   12:48:32

75
JDP 0175
2
Monitoring
2B.1. The Defence Engagement Board.  The Defence Engagement Board is chaired 
jointly by Director General Security Policy and by the Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office (FCO) Director General Defence and Intelligence.85  It provides the strategic 
context which should govern, and prioritise, using Defence assets to pursue the wide 
range of thematic strategies which also exist.  These strategies include:
•	 building stability overseas strategy; 
•	 counter terrorism (‘CONTEST’);
•	 counter proliferation;
•	 cyber security;
•	 organised crime;
•	 overseas territories;
•	 countries at risk of instability; and
•	 prosperity, consular and emerging powers.  
All international defence engagement and other activities will come together in the 
FCO-led country business plans in line with the direction of the Strategic Defence and 
Security Review.86 
2B.2. The Strategic Regional Implementation Group for Defence Engagement.  
Below the Defence Engagement Board is the 1* level Strategic Regional 
Implementation Group for Defence Engagement (STRIDE).  It is jointly chaired by 
Head Military Strategic Plans of the MOD, and Head Security Policy of the FCO, and 
brings together relevant stakeholders from across MOD and wider government.  
The STRIDE is responsible for ensuring implementation of the International Defence 
Engagement Strategy, in accordance with the strategic direction from the 3* Defence 
Engagement Board.  STRIDE meets four times a year.
85  How Defence Works – The New Operating Model , April 2013, paragraph 2.55.
86  International Defence Engagement Strategy , 7 February 2013, paragraph 19.
Annex 2B – Crisis 
management groups
Where footnoted, the material has been extracted from the online version of How Defence 
Works – The New Operating Model.  This is the single, authoritative, web-based source of 
information on how Defence works.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   75 03/12/2014   12:48:32

76
JDP 01
276
Response to emerging crisis or a change in strategic circumstances
2B.3. Current operations group.  A current operations group is chaired by Deputy 
Chief of the Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations) or the Assistant Chief 
of the Defence Staff (Operations) in his absence and attended by selected staffs 
from across the MOD.  A current operations group may be convened in response 
to an emerging crisis, or to study a particular aspect of a current operation (such 
as a change in strategic direction).  In the case of the former, it provides situational 
awareness, orientates the Defence Crisis Management Organisation (DCMO) to the 
crisis, and considers the utility of (as well as any risks involved in) military intervention, 
to inform the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) and hence Ministers.
2B.4. Strategic planning group.  A strategic planning group is usually led by the 
Assistant Chief of Defence Staff (Military Strategy) (ACDS (Mil Strat)), and includes 
members from across the MOD as required.  Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) 
J5 and other government departments are also usually represented.  A strategic 
planning group may be formed prior to a current operations group to initiate a 
political-military estimate to inform across-government political strategic analysis.  
Subsequently, once a decision has been taken to initiate more detailed planning, a 
strategic planning group drafts CDS’ planning directive to the Joint Commander.
2B.5. Permanent Joint Headquarters contingency planning team.  A contingency 
planning team, led by J5, includes staff from across PJHQ, the Joint Force 
Headquarters (JFHQ) and, where appropriate, the Joint Force Logistic Component 
Headquarters (JFLogCHQ), Joint Forces Command, Defence Equipment and Support, 
and the single-Services.  A contingency planning team may form in parallel with 
the associated MOD strategic planning group.87  Leadership and membership varies 
according to the priority, scale and complexity of the planning task (which may 
involve either contingency or crisis response planning).  On receiving CDS’ planning 
directive, a contingency planning team conducts a military strategic estimate.  A 
contingency planning team may also (re-)form to address longer-term issues as part of 
current operations planning.  The PJHQ contingency planning team process ensures 
that single-Service commands (including Joint Forces Command for joint enablers) 
are appropriately engaged in the PJHQ planning and decision-making processes for 
both contingent and current operations.  This also feeds into the DCMO.88
87  I n fast moving crises, a contingency planning team may form before a strategic planning group to 
maximise planning time.  In any case, for emerging crises and situations, the strategic planning group and 
contingency planning team work as a single entity, aided by video teleconferencing.
88  Op .cit.,  New Operating Model , paragraph 2.81.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   76 03/12/2014   12:48:32

77
JDP 0177
2
Managing commitments
2B.6. Current commitments team.  A current commitments team is formed at 
the onset of a crisis, or when CDS’ planning directive is issued.  It forms under an 
Operations Directorate lead (at 1* or OF-5 level), and includes staff from across 
the MOD.  It liaises with PJHQ, the single-Services, Joint Forces Command, other 
government departments and, where required, with multinational partners.  It 
functions throughout a crisis, providing a strategic focus for the DCMO.  A current 
commitments team coordinates advice to CDS, PUS and Ministers, and, from policy, 
provides clear and unambiguous direction and guidance for  conducting operations.  
Accordingly, a current commitments team, with the associated strategic planning 
group:
•	 formulates relevant military objectives in relation to the outcomes sought;
•	 prepares ministerial submissions and responses to parliamentary questions;  
•	 develops CDS operation’s directive to the Joint Commander (see Annex 1B).  
Thereafter, a current commitments team focuses on current issues concerning the 
deployment, activity, sustainment and recovery of forces.
2B.7. Permanent Joint Headquarters operations team.  Once CDS operation’s 
directive is issued, an operations team – led by PJHQ J389 and drawing upon other 
expertise as required – develops the Joint Commander’s Mission Directive (see   
Annex 2C).
2B.8. Operational liaison and reconnaissance team.  An operational liaison and 
reconnaissance team is despatched to a theatre of actual, or potential, operations 
at the outset of an emerging crisis or as part of contingency planning.  It adds 
significantly to situational awareness and facilitates planning.  The JFHQ has 
the core of two operational liaison and reconnaissance teams on permanent 
standby, comprising a team leader and core intelligence, operations, logistics and 
communications staff.  JFLogCHQ has a single, more logistics- or humanitarian 
assistance/disaster relief-focussed team at similar notice.  When required, staff 
from PJHQ, the single-Services, Joint Forces Command, the Stabilisation Unit and 
other government departments may participate to inform decision-making at the 
strategic and operational levels.  Where this wider representation is not possible, 
core operational liaison and reconnaissance team members should take checklists 
provided by those excluded from deploying, to ensure that the requisite information 
89  T his may be an entirely new operations team, or an existing one whose area of responsibility is 
relevant to the new operation.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   77 03/12/2014   12:48:32

78
JDP 01
278
is acquired.90  Where possible, an operational liaison and reconnaissance team 
should integrate with in-theatre UK diplomatic structures.  Reconnaissance should 
use military intelligence liaison officers (if deployed), UK military training teams (if 
applicable), Embassy or High Commission staffs and other in-country sources such 
as international organisations, non-governmental organisations and international 
commercial organisations.  Increasingly, operational liaison and reconnaissance teams 
will be integrated teams to support across-government analysis, including personnel 
from MOD, FCO, DFID and the Stabilisation Unit as required.  Operational liaison and 
reconnaissance team activities may include the following tasks.
a. Liaison.  Liaising with host-nation authorities, allies, potential coalition 
partners and other important agencies and organisations already present in 
the area of interest.
b. Reconnaissance.  Detailed reviews of, for example, appropriate locations 
for command and control elements, requirements for memoranda of 
understanding, existing or new status of forces agreements, or the need for 
access, basing and overflight.
c. Reviewing existing plans.  Reviewing existing contingency planning.
d. Advising and reporting.  Reporting through PJHQ, the operational liaison 
and reconnaissance team either returns to the UK to backbrief their findings, 
or it remains in theatre to facilitate the entry of a joint task force headquarters 
(or equivalent) and bolster any advance elements.
Crisis management group relationships
2B.9. Strategic planning group/other government departments.  Links between 
the MOD and other government departments are formalised in strategic planning 
group meetings, current operations groups and through a variety of other across-
government engagement, but considerable ad hoc liaison is achieved during routine 
staff discussions and other contacts.
2B.10. Strategic planning group/current operations group.  The strategic planning 
group leader is usually a member of the current operations group.  Other members of 
the strategic planning group may also be present at current operations groups, albeit 
as capability directors or specialists rather than as strategic planning group members.
90  W hile ideally there should be a separate reconnaissance at each level (strategic, operational and 
tactical), pressures of time and practical constraints imposed by the host nation may dictate that they be 
conducted concurrently.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   78 03/12/2014   12:48:32

79
JDP 0179
2
2B .11. Strategic planning group/current commitments team.  In the early stages 
of a crisis, a strategic planning group is committed to developing plans and then, 
as events unfold, refining them with PJHQ J5.  During this process, the Group’s 
Secretariat is responsible for raising submissions to Ministers, through the Director 
Operational Policy, on matters requiring their decision or attention.  A strategic 
planning group has no active involvement in coordinating current operations, 
which is the remit of the current commitments team.  The presence of a strategic 
planning group member within such a team ensures that current operations remain 
harmonised with strategic aims and helps the team to produce CDS’ operation’s 
directive.  As the crisis develops, the strategic planning group member also provides 
planning insights to the current commitments team. 
“When written in Chinese, the word  
‘crisis’ is composed of two characters.   
One represents danger and the other 
represents opportunity.”
John F. Kennedy
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   79 03/12/2014   12:48:32

80
JDP 01
280
Annex 2C – Planning at the strategic and 
operational level
Crisis management group Crisis response planning Contingency planning Current operations planning
MOD  
Chiefs of Staff Committee 
•	 Principal crisis and commitments management body
•	 Strategic coordination with other 
government departments (OGDs)
•	 Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) advice to Ministers
•	 Military strategic direction 
•	 Provides strategic direction
•	 Approves joint contingency plans (JCP) or pass to Ministers for approval
•	 Military strategic direction 
•	 Reviews commitments against 
national strategic objectives 
•	 Balance of forces across 
commitments
•	 Directs future strategy and force levels
Crisis monitoring groups
STRIDE
Strategic Regional 
Implementation group for Defence Engagement
•	 Ensures regional strategy direction 
is reflected in command plans
•	 Provides advice to the Defence Engagement Board on defence engagement regional strategies
•	 Reviews progress against delivery of regional strategies and Defence Engagement Board priorities
MOD  Defence crisis management brief
•	 Establish common understanding
•	 Assists decision making
•	 Enables exchange of views within 
MOD and with OGDs
•	 Establish common 
understanding
•	 Assists decision-making
•	 Enables exchange of views 
within MOD and with OGDs
•	 Establish common 
understanding
•	 Assists decision-making
•	 Enables exchange of views 
within MOD and with OGDs
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   80 03/12/2014   12:48:32

81
JDP 0181
2
Crisis management group Crisis response planning Contingency planning Current operations planning
Crisis response group
MOD  
current operations group
•	 Provides Deputy Chief of Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations) (DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)) with appropriate expert advice 
•	 Provides initial briefing to CDS and Chiefs of Staff (COS)
•	 Decides on forming a strategic planning group (SPG)/current commitments team (CCT)
MOD  strategic planning group
•	 Political/military estimate
•	 Long-term planning (MOD J5)
•	 Liaison with other government departments
•	 Interaction with Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ)
•	 Produce military options paper for DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)
•	 CDS’ planning directive
•	 Political/military estimate
•	 CDS’ planning directive
•	 Submissions to Ministers
•	 Refine/revise political/military estimate
•	 Maintain long-term planning
•	 Contribute to cross-government strategy/plan
•	 Update CDS directives
PJHQ  contingency planning team
•	 Close liaison with MOD
•	 Conducts military strategic estimate (MSE) with SPG/CCT
•	 MSE summary
•	 MSE
•	 Joint planning guides (JPG)
•	 JCPs
•	 Reviews/refines MSE in liaison with CCT
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   81 03/12/2014   12:48:33

82
JDP 01
282
Crisis management group Crisis response planning Contingency planning Current operations planning
Crisis orchestration groups
MOD  
current commitments team 
•	 Monitoring of current ops and 
issues (MOD J3)
•	 Staffs MSE (in conjunction with PJHQ contingency planning team (CPT))
•	 Liaison with other government departments on current issues
•	 Ministerial submissions
•	 CDS’ operations directive
•	 Coordinate reviews 
•	 Liaison with other government departments and allies
•	 CDS’ operations directive review
•	 Force Level Review 
PJHQ 
operations team
•	 Expanded from CPT 
•	 Run current ops for Chief of Joint Operations (CJO)
•	 Joint commander’s mission directive (in conjunction with CPT)
•	 Support CDS operations directive reviews
•	 Initiate PJHQ review process
•	 Update/reissue extant Joint commander’s mission directives
PJHQ/JFHQ/JFLogCHQ  operational reconnaissance and liaison team
•	 Theatre reconnaissance
•	 Potential forward planning nucleus for deployed joint task force headquarters 
•	 Inform/conduct initial campaign planning
•	 Theatre recce
•	 Review/ develop contingency planning
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   82 03/12/2014   12:48:33

83
JDP 0183
2
Crisis Management Group Crisis response planning Contingency planning Current operations planning
JFHQ 
situational awareness group
•	 Monitor the development of crisis
•	 Initial and deployment planning
JFHQ 
planning groups
•	 Conduct operations planning
•	 Conduct deployment planning
•	 Campaign planning
•	 Deployment plans
•	 Subsequent orders and plans
•	 Conduct campaign assessment
•	 Iteratively refine operations 
planning
•	 Issue subsequent orders and direction
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   83 03/12/2014   12:48:33

84
JDP 01
284
Appendix 2C1 – Planning processes
Crisis response planning
inform
Strategic
level
Operational
level
T actical
level T actical missions and tasks
Cabinet
DCMO
MOD
PJHQ
OGD
Single
Services
Joint 
Forces 
Command
DSF
CDM
Allies 
IO
NGO
CDS to
Political strategic analysis
SofS to
Cabinet
Crisis
JTFHQ 
(or other HQ) Collaborative planning
Operational estimate
JTFC direction
Military
strategic
estimate
CDS 
Planning
Directive
COG DCMO
brief
Political/
military
estimate Military
strategic
estimate
summary
CDS 
Directive
Jt Comd Directiv e
SPG
CPT OT
CCT
J1         J2         J3         J4         J5         J6         J7         J8         J9
Legend
CCT
CDMCDSCOGCPTDCMO
DSF
HQIOJTFCJTFHQJt ComdMOD
Current Commitments T eamChief of Defence MaterielChief of the Defence StaﬀCurrent Operations GroupContingency Planning T eamDefence Crisis Management OrganisationDirector Special ForcesHeadquartersInternational organisationJoint T ask Force CommanderJoint T as
k Force Headquarters
Joint CommanderMinistry of Defence
STRIDE
Out of 
theatre
Theatre
              NSC             Cabinet Oﬃce/sub-committee
NGONSCOGDOLRT
OT
PJHQSAGSofSSPGSTRIDE
UK
Non-governmental organisation
National Security CouncilOther government departmentOperational Liaison and Reconnaissance T eamOperations T eamPermanent Joint HeadquartersSituational Awareness GroupSecretary of StateStrategic Planning GroupStrategic Regional Implementation Group for Defence EngagementUnited Kingdom
OLRT SAG
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   84 03/12/2014   12:48:33

85
JDP 0185
2
Cabinet
OGD
Single
Services
Joint 
Forces 
Command
DSF
CDM
Allies 
IO
NGO
STRIDE
              NSC             Cabinet Oﬃce/sub-committee
PJHQ
J1         J2         J3         J4         J5         J6         J7         J8         J9
DCMO
Submission to
CDS/SofS/Cabinet
JTFHQ
Military
strategic 
estimate
Joint 
contingency
plan
Joint 
planning 
guide
CPT
CJO
SPG
OLRT - Recce
MILO/HN/embassy/consulate
CDS Planning 
Directive
Political/military 
estimate
Legend
CDM
CDS
CJOCPTDCMO
DSF
HNIOJTFHQMILO
Chief of Defence Materiel
Chief of the Defence StaﬀChief of Joint OperationsContingency Planning T eamDefence Crisis Management OrganisationDirector Special ForcesHos
t nation
International organisationJoint T ask Force HeadquartersMilitary Intelligence Liaison Oﬃcer
Strategic
level
Operational
level
T actical
level
Out of 
theatre
Theatre
MOD
Political strategic analysis
Potential
crisis
MOD
NGONSC
OGD
OLRT
PJHQ
SofSSPGSTRIDE
Ministry of Defence
Non-governmental organisationNational Security CouncilOther government departmentOperational Liaison and Reconnaissance T eamPermanent Joint HeadquartersSecretary of State
Strategic
 Planning Group
Strategic Regional Implementation group for Defence Engagement
Contingency planning
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   85 03/12/2014   12:48:33

86
JDP 01
286
Current operations planning
This example is for guidance only.  Deviations, where appropriate, are permitted.  It is not 
necessary to keep to paragraph numbers – for example there may be one or more paragraphs 
per heading.  It is, however, essential to maintain the order of the paragraph headings so that 
an auditable and recognisable logic chain is maintained.  Where headings are not needed, 
this should be stated.
Changing
situation
Current Commitments T eam
Chief of Defence MaterielChief of Defence StaﬀCurrent Operations GroupContingency Planning T eamDefence Crisis Management OrgansationDirector Special ForcesInternational organisation(s)Joint T ask Force HeadquartersMinistry of Defence
Legend
CCT
CDMCDS
COG
CPTDCMO
DSF
IO
JTFHQMOD
COG Committee
JTFHQ/ 
NCC
T actical activity
Assessment
Campaign 
review
DCMO
PJHQ
SPGCCT
CDS 
Directive 
review
OT
Joint 
Command 
Direc tive 
CPT
If required
Cross-government
strategy/plan
Political/
military 
estimate
National strategy
CDS to SofS to PM
Military 
strategic 
Emerging 
long-term 
Force 
level 
Strategic
level
Operational
level
T actical
level
Cabinet
OGD
Single
Services
Joint 
Forces 
Command
DSF
CDM
Allies 
IO
NGO
STRIDE
Out of 
theatre
Theatre
              NSC             Cabinet Oﬃce/sub-committee
MOD
Non-governmental organisation
National Security CouncilOther government departmentOperations T eamPermanent Joint HeadquartersPrime MinisterSecretary of StateStrategic Planning GroupStrategic Regional Implementation 
group for 
Defence Engagement
NGO
NSCOGD
OT
PJHQ
PM
SofSSPGSTRIDE
National Contingent CommanderNCC
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   86 03/12/2014   12:48:34

87
JDP 0187
2
Annex 2D – Representative 
Joint Commander’s    
Mission Directive
This example is for guidance only.  Deviations, where appropriate, are permitted.  It is not 
necessary to keep to paragraph numbers – for example there may be one or more paragraphs 
per heading.  It is, however, essential to maintain the order of the paragraph headings so that 
an auditable and recognisable logic chain is maintained.  Where headings are not needed, 
this should be stated.
The Joint Commander’s Mission Directive
Issued by: [The Joint Commander] 
Issued to: [The Joint Force Commander (JFC),91 National Contingent Commander 
(NCC), or other subordinate commander as appropriate] and, in conjunction with 
other directives to: [Reference to other extant directives to subordinate commanders 
within the same joint operations area] 
References:
Situation
1. [Describes the generic circumstances leading to the requirement for the 
operation including:]
2. The legal basis for Operation [****].
3. Operational situation. 
91  J FC: Throughout this publication Joint Force Commander (JFC) is used when referring to the 
operational-level commander of a joint force, regardless of how it has been constructed (for example 
Joint Task Force (JTF), Deployed Joint Task Force (DJTF) or Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF)).  JFC is used 
in this way throughout NATO doctrine.  The UK’s Joint Forces Command will not be abbreviated in this 
document.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   87 03/12/2014   12:48:34

88
JDP 01
288
4. Her Majesty’s Government’s strategy. 
a. Strategic aim.
b. Strategic end-state. 
c. Political objectives.
d. Strategic narrative. 
e. Information effect.
5. Coalition strategy.  
a. Coalition strategy. 
b. Coalition strategic centre of gravity.
6. UK’s military strategy.
a. Chief of Defence Staff’s intent.  
Concept of operations
[The Joint Commander may provide an outline concept for the deployment, 
sustainment and recovery of a Joint Force, or more detailed instructions in Annex A].
7. Joint Commander’s intent. 
8. Joint Commander’s interim operational end-state. 
9. Joint Commander’s operational end-state. 
10. Joint Commander’s key themes and messages.
11. Scheme of manoeuvre.  [As appropriate, covering deployment, sustainment and 
recovery].  
12. Main effort.  
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   88 03/12/2014   12:48:34

89
JDP 0189
2
13. Policy context.  [The concept of operations will be directed by Permanent Joint 
Headquarters (PJHQ) within a developing policy context articulated by MOD UK 
through]: 
a. Strategic guidance.
b. Engagement with the other nations’ governments [as required]. 
c. Engagement with UK other government departments.
d. Engagement with a coalition chain of command
e. Strategic presentation.  
Mission
14. [A clear, concise statement of the task of the command and its purpose].
Specified tasks
15. [Listed by component commander].
16. Command of forces assigned.  [The UK command and control architecture is 
described here with the detail reflected in Annex B].
Coordinating instructions
17. Operational timings. 
18. Intelligence.  [Chief of Defence Intelligence will retain overall direction for 
Defence Intelligence.  Specific instructions are contained in Annex D]
19. Information strategy.  [Adheres to UK information strategy and covers 
information operations, psychological operations, media operations and civil-military 
cooperation].
20. Force protection.  [Direction at Annex J].
21. Rules of engagement.  [Guidance at Annex E].
22. Joint targeting.  [Guidance at Annex II].
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   89 03/12/2014   12:48:34

90
JDP 01
290
23. Training.  [Direction at Annex BB].
24. Financial accounting and policy advice.  [Financial accounting instructions and 
policy advice are detailed in Annex FF].
25. Detainees and prisoners.  [Direction at Annex PP].
26. Deployment of civilians.  [Details of all civilians and MOD employees deploying 
on operations are passed to PJHQ.  Instructions for deployed contractors are 
contained in the Appendix 2 to Annex FF].
27. Status of forces.  [Reference to legal status is governed by the Annex to relevant 
United Nations Special Representatives].
28. Lessons identified.  [As directed by PJHQ SOP 7033].  
29. Public Affairs.  [Annex TT].
Logistics
30. Logistic direction.  [Contained in Annex R].  
31. Personnel.  [Personnel issues are contained in Appendix 2 to Annex R].
32. Medical.  [Medical instructions for UK forces deployed are contained in        
Annex QQ].
33. Visitors.  [Theatre visits policy].
UK command and control
34. Command and control.  [UK command relationships are shown at Annex B, with 
tabulated command relationships at Appendix B-2.  This paragraph will specify the 
supported command].
a. National command.  [All forces remain under national command or 
otherwise as determined here]
b. Full command.  [Single-Service Chiefs retain full command of UK assigned 
forces].
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   90 03/12/2014   12:48:34

91
JDP 0191
2
c. Coalition management.  [PJHQ, working within MODUK’s policy direction, 
has the responsibility for operational liaison with national capitals on coalition 
force levels and operational matters].
d. Maritime forces.  [Outlines the promulgation method for changes of 
OPCOM of Maritime forces between Chief of Naval Staff/First Sea Lord and 
Chief of Joint Operations (CJO)].
e. Special forces.
f. Senior British Military representative.  [OPCOM CJO or as otherwise 
directed in CDS’ Directive]. 
35. COMBRITFOR.  [Nominated here]. 
36. National veto.  [CJO’s direction on national veto policy].      
37. Liaison.  [Assigns a coordinating authority and guidance for matters that cannot 
be resolved in theatre – details if required in Appendix 4 to Annex B].
38. Reporting.  [Timing and issues of importance requiring report].
a. Routine reporting. 
b. Incident reporting. 
c. Post-operation reporting.  [Including the requirement to capture lessons.  
Details if required in Annex LL].
39. Codeword/SIC.  [The codeword is usually OFFICIAL SENSITIVE; however its 
meaning is SECRET].
40. Communications and Information Systems plan.  [Outlines the responsibilities 
for UK national and coalition communications and information systems.  Details as 
required in Annex Q)].   
41. Information management.  [Details the requirements to keep records.  Specific 
Information Management instructions are contained in Annex CC].
Joint Commander [Name].
Date         
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   91 03/12/2014   12:48:34

92
JDP 01
292
Annexes: [The complete standard list of Annexes to OPlans is in the Allied Command 
Operations (ACO) Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive (COPD), Annex C].
•	 A. C oncept of operations
•	 B. T ask organisation and command relationships
•	 D. Intelligence
•	 E. R ules of engagement
•	 J. Fo rce Protection
•	 Q. C ommunications and information systems
•	 R. Logistics
•	 AA. Legal 
•	 BB. T raining and mission rehearsals
•	 CC. C ommand information management
•	 FF. F inancial support
•	 II. J oint targeting
•	 LL. L essons learned.
•	 PP . M ilitary police
•	 QQ. Medical
•	 TT. P ublic affairs  
This Annex summarises the EU military planning process.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   92 03/12/2014   12:48:34

93
JDP 0193
2
European Union capability
2E.1. The EU has the capacity to conduct EU-led operations if the EU Council elects 
to do so.  The Council exercises overall responsibility for planning and conducting 
EU-led operations, either civilian or military, delegating political control and strategic 
direction to the Political and Security Committee.
2E.2. EU-led operations could involve a range of instruments of power, including 
diplomatic, economic, humanitarian and civil, as well as military and, therefore, these 
need to be coordinated.  The EU, especially the European Commission, could already 
be engaged in areas where UK national or coalition military operations are being 
considered.  Alternatively, the EU could become engaged either militarily, or in other 
ways, in crises where the UK has a strategic interest.
Permanent military structures
2E.3. Permanent military structures are provided by the European Union Military 
Committee (EUMC), and the European Union Military Staff (EUMS) who are located in 
Brussels.  
a. EU Military Committee.  The EUMC is responsible for providing the Political 
and Security Committee with military advice, and recommendations, on 
all military matters, and for directing all military activities within the EU’s 
remit.  The Chairman of the EUMC acts as the primary point of contact for the 
operation commander92 during EU-led military operations.
b. EU Military Staff.  The EUMS provide early warning, situation assessment, 
and conduct planning at the political and strategic level for Petersberg tasks,93 
92  T he EU title assigned to the officer performing the (broadly) equivalent role of a Joint Force 
Commander.
93  T he Petersberg tasks are an integral part of the Common Security and Defence Policy.  They were 
explicitly included in the Treaty on European Union (Article 17) and cover: humanitarian and rescue 
tasks; peace-keeping tasks; and tasks of combat forces in crisis management, including peacemaking.  
These tasks were set out in the Petersberg Declaration adopted at the Ministerial Council of the Western 
European Union (WEU) in June 1992.
Annex 2E – European Union 
military planning
This Annex summarises the EU military planning process.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   93 03/12/2014   12:48:34

94
JDP 01
294
including identifying appropriate European national and multinational forces.  
This could include developing military strategic options, preparing an EUMC 
Initiating Military Directive to the Operation Commander, and coordinating 
military planning with the EU’s Commission and Parliament.
2E.4. In the event of a crisis, the EU assesses options, usually in consultation with 
nations and other international organisations, especially NATO.94  Military aspects of 
the crisis should be examined by the EUMC, drawing on the expertise of the EUMS.95  
At an appropriate juncture, following the development of a crisis management 
concept, the Council should approve a general political assessment and a cohesive set 
of options.  Thereafter, the EUMC should issue a Military Strategic Option Directive96 
to the Director General of the EUMS, formally inviting him to draw up one or a series 
of military strategic options.
2E.5. Once the Council has decided to take action, and a military strategic option 
has been selected, an operation commander should be appointed, a chain of 
command designated, and an operation headquarters97 selected.  There are three 
options available.98
a. EU-led operations with recourse to NATO planning assets.  NATO’s           
ACO-J5 planning staff generate initial planning support for the EU, and provide 
planning staff and facilities thereafter.  Deputy Supreme Allied Commander 
Europe would be the likely choice as operation commander.
b. EU-led operation without recourse to NATO planning assets.  If NATO 
planning assets were not to be employed, one nation could elect to act as the 
framework nation,99 using one of five potential EU operation headquarters 
(located in the UK (Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ)), France, Germany, 
Italy and Greece).
94  T he EU Concept for Military Planning at the Political and Strategic Level is at:  http://register.consilium.
europa.eu/doc/srv?l=EN&t=PDF&gc=true&sc=false&f=ST%2010687%202008%20INIT  
95  E U crisis management procedures envisage the need for the European Union Military Staff (EUMS) to 
draw on operations planning expertise from either EU Member States and/or NATO. 
96  T hese terms differ from NATO terminology since the EU structures and way of handling crises are 
different from NATO.  Wherever possible, however, NATO terminology has been adopted.
97  B roadly equivalent to Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).
98  EU Operation Headquarters Standard Operating Procedures , version 4.0, dated 8 June 2006. 
99  T he EU defines a framework nation as: a Member State or a group of Member States that has 
volunteered to, and that the Council has agreed should, have specific responsibilities in an operation 
over which EU exercises political control.  A framework nation provides the Operation commander/
operation headquarters and the core of the military chain of command, together with its staff support, 
the computer information systems and logistic framework, and contributes with a significant amount 
of assets and capabilities to the operation.  Although EU concepts and procedures remain applicable, 
procedures may also reflect those of the framework nation.  EU Framework Nation Concept 11278/02, dated 
25 July 2002.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   94 03/12/2014   12:48:34

95
JDP 0195
2
c. EU Operations Centre.  The EUMS maintains the capability to form an 
operation headquarters in Brussels, drawing on nations as required.100
2E.6. Selecting a force commander and force headquarters101 could occur 
simultaneously or, if alternatives are available, wait for the operation commander 
to be appointed.  The most likely command and control template, based on a 
framework nation model, would have both the operation and force headquarters 
formed by the same nation, although other command and control combinations are 
possible.  Where a framework nation model is used, other EU nations, as well as EUMS 
personnel, could be expected to provide personnel to fill posts in both headquarters.
2E .7. Following a Council decision to take action, the EUMC should issue an 
Initiating Military Directive to the operation commander, which directs him to begin 
operational-level planning.102  The EU planning methodology is very similar to that of 
NATO, and the outputs include a concept of operations (CONOPS) and operation plans 
(OPLANs), and ultimately generate, direction, deployment, sustainment and recovery 
of a joint force.  The EU process is, however, initially more ‘linear’ than NATO’s, which 
can conduct operations planning in parallel at various levels.  This is principally due 
to the decision not to establish a permanent EU command structure that would 
duplicate NATO.  Hence subordinate levels of command have to be established for a 
particular operation before planning in parallel can commence.  Efforts to streamline 
the process, for example, by designating an operation commander and operation 
headquarters early, are used as much as possible.
2E.8. Although exact command and control arrangements for any EU-led military 
operation should be mission-dependent, they normally encompass three levels of 
command, as shown in Figure 2E.1.
100  P articularly where there is a joint civil/military aspect or where no national HQ has been identified; EU 
Principles for EU HQs, 2 June 2005. 
101  E quates to the UK’s Joint Task Force Headquarters; EU Force Headquarters Standard Operating 
Procedures, version 3.0, dated 30 June 2006.
102  O n some occasions, the operation commander may not be selected until after the Initiating Military 
Directive (IMD) has been issued.  This is less preferable, as early appointment allows a commander to 
engage fully in the planning and direction process.
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   95 03/12/2014   12:48:34

96
JDP 01
296
2E.9. Comprehensive approach.  EU planning for EU-led operations takes into 
account the EU comprehensive approach to crisis management.  Such planning 
cannot be conducted in isolation.  The tools available to the EU in times of crisis 
are wide ranging across its institutions and policy areas and comprise political and 
humanitarian, as well as military, actions.  This comprehensive approach leads to an 
important principle in EU military headquarters at all levels, which is the development 
of links, dependent on the mission, to ensure coordination with: governments 
and authorities in the crisis area; authorities of force contributing nations; EU 
representatives and bodies (for example, the EU Police Mission); international 
organisations and non-governmental organisations; supporting headquarters; and 
national intelligence organisations.
Military-strategic
level
Operational
level
Tactical
level
Operation 
Commander
Force 
Commander
In UK likely to be CJO
Forces
In UK or NATO could be
Joint Force Commander
Land
Component
Command
Air
Component
Command
Maritime
Component
Command
Other
forces
Forces Forces
EU bodies
IO
NGO
Legend
CJO
EU
Chief of Joint Operations
European Union
IO
NGO
International organisation
Non-governmental organisation
Figure 2E.1 – EU command and control arrangements
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   96 03/12/2014   12:48:35

97
JDP 0197
2
Notes:
Operational-level planningOperational-level planning
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   97 03/12/2014   12:48:35

20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   98 03/12/2014   12:48:36

Commanding the 
force
Chapter 3 discusses command considerations in integrated, 
multi-agency and multinational contexts.  It addresses the 
UK’s interpretation of mission command and identifies 
attributes desirable in coalition force commanders.  It 
discusses the impact of multinationality on organisational 
agility and addresses national contingent command.  It also 
introduces some media, legal and political considerations for 
commanders.
Chapter 3
JDP 01
99
3
Nelson image © Government Art Collection;  Woodward image © Imperial War Museum
Section 1 – Command . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  101
Section 2 – Command approach   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  105
Section 3 – Command in a wider context . . . . . . . . . . .  107
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   99 03/12/2014   12:48:37

100
JDP 01
Section 1 – Command
Leadership........ is just plain you. 
Viscount Slim 
We learn something new everyday.  No 
matter how gifted people are, they can 
always learn and should be constantly and 
actively seeking to do so.  You learn by 
doing but you must also be able to relate 
your experience to a wider context.  Hence the 
need to be self-critical, self-examining and 
also the importance of reading and thinking.
 
Air Chief Marshal Sir Brian Burridge 
”
“
“
”
Commanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   100 03/12/2014   12:48:38

101
JDP 01101
3
3.1. Command embraces authority, responsibility and accountability.  It has a legal 
and constitutional status – codified in Queen’s Regulations.  It is also vested in a 
commander by their superior.  Authority enables an individual to influence events and 
order subordinates to implement decisions.  While commanders can devolve specific 
authority, they retain overall responsibility for their command – responsibility is thus 
fundamental to command.  Accountability involves a liability and obligation to answer 
for properly using delegated responsibility, authority and resources; it includes the 
duty to act.  Thus, a commander who delegates responsibility should grant sufficient 
authority to subordinates to enable them to carry out their task.  Subordinates remain 
accountable to their superior for executing assigned tasks.
3.2. Exercising command includes the process by which a commander makes 
decisions, conveys their intent and impresses their will upon subordinates.  It 
comprises three inter-related aspects.
a. Decision-making.  Timely, accurate and effective decision-making 
(including assessing risk) enables adaptive command, optimises tempo and 
leads to success on operations.  The art of command depends on recognising 
when to decide and when to act.  Both rely on good judgement and intuition, 
based on situational understanding.  However, commanders may need to 
identify fleeting opportunities and exploit them on the basis of incomplete 
information.  Decisions should be communicated effectively and, where 
possible, personally.  This inspires confidence and promotes cohesion between 
commanders and their subordinates.  The ability to make difficult decisions and 
remain resolute, particularly when the outcome is uncertain, underpins strong 
leadership.
b. Leadership.  Commanders have sole responsibility for ensuring that their 
plan delivers the best chances of success.  The way in which they exercise 
leadership is determined by their character, style and experience, as well as the 
mix of personalities within their force or organisation.  The intangible nature of 
the relationship between commanders and their subordinates may affect the 
Chapter 3 – Commanding 
the force
Section 1 – Command”
Command 
embraces 
authority, 
responsibility 
and 
accountability.
”
“
”
Commanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   101 03/12/2014   12:48:38

102
JDP 01102
3
way in which forces are employed and the enterprises they undertake.  Different 
situations demand different styles of leadership, requiring varying amounts 
of regulation, delegation, inspiration and coercion.  Leadership is examined in 
more detail in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine.
c. Control.  Control is coordinating activity, through processes and structures, 
to enable a commander to manage risk and achieve success.  The extent 
of military control over a situation will be influenced by a range of external 
and internal factors.  Control may be delegated to specialist staff, systems or 
processes.  But commanders may need to retain personal control to ensure that 
their intent is achieved.  Through appropriate decentralisation and delegation, 
commanders should seek to increase their subordinates’ freedom to act. 
3.3. A commander’s immediate subordinates may themselves be senior, experienced 
commanders, including those from other nations.  Subordinates should have 
confidence in their commander’s professional ability, judgement and firmness of 
purpose.  Commanders should explain the rationale underlying their chosen course 
of action so that their subordinates understand the reasoning behind their decision 
and have a clear sense of purpose.  Where this does not happen, subordinates should 
have confidence that their commander’s decisions are properly considered and valid.  
Furthermore, commanders should always be prepared to make use of the ideas and 
objections of others.  Good ideas are not the sole preserve of senior ranks.
Exercising command includes the process by which a commander makes decisions, conveys their intent        
and impresses their will upon subordinates
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   102 03/12/2014   12:48:38

103
JDP 01103
3
3.4. Commanders may have to exercise their command when there is uncertainty, 
risk, violence, fear and danger.  Their success depends largely on experience, 
flexibility and determination.  Ultimately, it is the commander’s ability to shape those 
aspects amenable to control and retain sufficient capacity for the unexpected that 
must prevail.
3.5. Principles of joint and multinational command.  The principles of joint and 
multinational command are:
•	 unity of command;
•	 continuity of command;
•	 clear chain of command;
•	 integration of command;
•	 the manoeuvrist approach; and
•	 mission command.
These are detailed in AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine, Chapter 6 but mission command, 
as described in NATO doctrine, has a slightly different nuance to that adopted by 
our forces.103  The two are fully complementary but, while Allied doctrine focuses 
mission command at the joint operational level, we encourage using it down to the 
lowest levels.  Our national commanders should not automatically expect allies to 
apply mission command as described below.  This is important when the UK is acting 
in a commanding role, and equally when acting as a subordinate.  UK commanders 
operating in an alliance context should understand mission command.104
Mission command
3.6. The UK’s philosophy of mission command has four enduring tenets:
•	 timely decision-making;
•	 thorough understanding of a superior commander’s intent;
•	 clear responsibility on the part of subordinates to fulfil intent; and
•	 determination to take the plan through to a successful conclusion.
3.7. The fundamental guiding principle is the absolute responsibility to act, or to 
decide not to act, within the framework of a superior commander’s intent.  This 
approach requires a style of command that promotes decentralised command, 
freedom and speed of action and initiative, but which is responsive to superior 
direction when subordinates overreach themselves.
103 Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine . 
104 M ission command, in an Alliance context, is described in AJP-01.
Commanders 
success 
depends 
largely on 
experience, 
flexibility and 
determination.
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   103 03/12/2014   12:48:38

104
JDP 01104
3
3.8. In practical terms, mission command has five essential elements:
•	 commanders must ensure that their subordinates understand their intent, 
their own contributions and the context within which they are to act;
•	 commanders should exercise a minimum of control over their subordinates, 
consistent with their experience and ability, while retaining responsibility for 
their actions;
•	 subordinates are told what effect they are to realise and why;
•	 subordinates are allocated sufficient resources to carry out their missions; and
•	 subordinates decide for themselves how best to achieve their superior’s 
intent.
3.9. Mission command assists subordinates to understand their commander’s 
intent and their place within the plan.  This enables them to execute activity with the 
maximum freedom of action.
3.10. Mission command requires delegating authority and agile execution.  A 
commander should be pragmatic when applying mission command as not all 
subordinates are equally capable.  A commander should be flexible in the extent 
to which they delegate their authority; this will depend upon the situation, the 
nature of their command, the degree of multinational and multi-agency interaction, 
and the predominant activities being undertaken.  Delegation will also depend on 
commanders’ and subordinates’ abilities, training, personalities and experience.
3.11. Uncertainty or ambiguity within a particular operational context may drive a 
commander to exercise more, rather than less, control.  A commander may need to 
intervene to exploit opportunities and mitigate risks that may not be fully appreciated 
by subordinates, but they should be wary of unnecessary intervention.  This tends to 
create risk-aversion and a dependency culture amongst subordinates. 
A commander should be pragmatic when 
applying mission command as not all 
subordinates are equally capable. 
”
“
Section 2 – Command approach
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   104 03/12/2014   12:48:38

105
JDP 01105
3
3.12. Effective command, including the processes and systems that underpin it, is a 
vital component of delivering military operations.  The operational-level commander 
(Joint Force Commander105 (JFC)) is responsible for both the plan and its subsequent 
execution.  Their personal effectiveness is determined by a combination of ability, 
intellect and intuition.  However, it is often their instinct and vision that confer distinct 
advantage.  Moltke referred to this decisive aspect as ‘talent’:106 
and T E Lawrence as the ‘irrational tenth’:
3.13. Intellect and practical ability embody the particular skill that a JFC brings to an 
operation.  This skill is applied through a variety of established principles, practices 
and procedures, themselves honed through training, education and experience.  
While attention tends to focus on the additional benefit of a commander’s instinct, 
this is most effective if it is based upon skilled and drilled professionalism. 
105  T hroughout this publication, Joint Force Commander (JFC) is used when referring to the operational-
level commander of a joint force, regardless of how it has been constructed (for example, Joint Task 
Force (JTF)/Deployed Joint Task Force (DJTF)/Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF)).  JFC is used in this way 
throughout NATO doctrine.  The UK’s Joint Forces Command will not be abbreviated in this document.
106  M oltke ‘the Elder’ Helmut von, Military Works, 1912.
107  T E L awrence, The Evolution of a Revolt, 1920.
Section 2 – Command approach
‘Thus war becomes an art – an art, of course, which is served by many sciences.  In 
war, as in art, we find no universal forms; in neither can a rule take the place of talent.’
Moltke107
‘Nine tenths of tactics are certain, and taught in books: but the irrational tenth is like 
the flash of the kingfisher across the pool and that is the test of generals.  It can only 
be ensured by instinct sharpened by thought, practising the stroke so often that at 
the crisis it is as natural as reflex’
T E Lawrence108
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   105 03/12/2014   12:48:38

106
JDP 01106
3
3.14. Understanding equips leaders with the insight and foresight needed to make 
effective decisions, as well as manage the associated risks and second-order and 
subsequent effects.  JDP 04, Understanding develops the commander’s approach to 
understanding, whether as an individual, as part of a team, or in a coalition.108,109  
3.15. Moral and physical courage are important qualities in a commander, at whatever 
level, although at the operational-level moral courage is particularly important.110  
Command styles are heavily dependent on personality, but in deciding on an 
approach to command, JFCs may consider the following issues.
a. At what level are decisions to be made?  Avoid the danger of commanding 
too little and interfering too much.  Consider the command responsibilities and 
authority in relation to the type of opponent (conventional, irregular and so on).
b. How to maintain morale?  Consider combining four characteristics – 
effective leadership, strong discipline (self and group), a feeling of comradeship 
and self-respect.
c. How to build relations?  Consider the importance of generating trust, 
shared confidence and knowledge from similar experiences, noting the value of 
credibility. 
d. How to bond the headquarters?  Mission command is as applicable to 
subordinate staffs as it is to subordinate commanders to deliver effective control 
and coordination.
e. How to disseminate their intent widely?  JFCs should personally issue their 
mission and concept of operations, and be closely involved in articulating how 
they are going to command the operation.  These elements, but especially 
commander’s intent where JFCs express the overall effect they wish to achieve 
against the adversary, are critical in enabling subordinates to act purposefully 
when faced with unforeseen opportunities, or in the absence of orders.
f. How to extend their personal influence?  The need to influence both 
domestic and international decision-makers is an important factor.  In 
multinational operations, identifying the point where the greatest national 
influence can be achieved, underpinned by the contribution of credible and 
robust military forces, is vital.
108  JDP 04, Understanding .  
109 C ommand philosophy is addressed in more detail in AJP-01.
110  Further detail on the moral and physical component of fighting power is provided in JDP 0-01, UK 
Defence Doctrine . 
Section 3 – Command in a wider context
Moral and 
physical 
courage are 
important 
qualities.
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   106 03/12/2014   12:48:38

107
JDP 01107
3
g. Where to locate their command?  Where, and how best, to command 
a force is a challenge.  JFCs must make time to go forward, make their 
own estimate of the situation, and see their commanders and troops.  
Communications allow JFCs more flexible options for command and control and 
headquarters location.  This should be tempered by the risks of:
•	 increasing their vulnerability; 
•	 potentially removing them from locations of political influence 
(especially when they have chosen to collocate their own headquarters 
at the diplomatic focal point); and
•	 becoming unnecessarily and adversely entangled in tactical activity. 
h. How to remain agile?  The UK’s approach to command emphasises 
agility as a way of dealing with complexity and optimising effectiveness.111  By 
remaining agile, JFCs are able to seize and retain the initiative, and maintain 
decision advantage over their opponent(s), to exploit opportunities and 
reinforce success.  To fully exploit all resources, JFCs should identify any change 
in the weight of effort required in relation to different activities.  This ensures 
that opportunities created by success are not wasted and that we minimise 
redundant activity.
3.16. In an integrated approach, the need to coordinate and synchronise or, at the 
very least de-conflict, the capabilities and activities of other agencies, creates a more 
complex environment for operational-level decisions.  A commander’s ability to make 
decisions is strengthened by:
•	 an empathy for different organisational cultures, engendered by institutional 
familiarity, trust and transparency, and through frequent personal contact 
and information sharing;
111  Ag ile: able to move quickly and easily.  Able to think and understand quickly.  Concise Oxford English 
Dictionary (COED), Edition 12. 
Section 3 – Command in a wider context
A commander 
must make 
time to go 
forward, make 
their own 
estimate of 
the situation, 
and see their 
commanders 
and troops.
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   107 03/12/2014   12:48:39

108
JDP 01108
3
•	 information superiority which 
ensures that the potentially 
overwhelming volume of 
information available to a 
commander does not obstruct 
or overload their capacity for 
decision-making;113
•	 personal communications of 
decisions to subordinates; and 
•	 confidence particularly when 
information is ambiguous or 
incomplete.
AJP-01, Chapter 6 addresses decision-
making at the operational-level.  Joint 
Doctrine Note 3/11, Decision-making 
and Problem-solving: Human and 
Organisational Factors114 addresses 
improved decision-making in all complex 
problem solving, by understanding 
better the factors that influence the way 
individuals, groups and organisations 
think and behave.
112 See Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 2/13, Information Superiority .
113 See JDN 3/11, Decision-making and Problem-solving: Human and Organisational Factors .
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   108 03/12/2014   12:48:40

109
JDP 01109
3
Legal considerations
3.17. All military operations must be conducted within a legal framework.  The laws 
that apply will vary depending upon the nature of the operation.  The applicable law 
may be a combination of international and domestic (national) laws and will include 
human rights law.  Failing to comply with the law, or even perceived failure, can 
significantly undermine campaign authority.114  JFCs should ensure that:
•	 they, and those under their command, understand their legal responsibilities 
and obligations and are trained on the relevant rules of engagement;
•	 all commanders ensure they are compliant with the law, and observe rules of 
engagement, by exercising command authority over their subordinates;
•	 in a multinational context, they consider the differing national policy 
positions and legal obligations of respective national contingents;
•	 any suspected unlawful activity is reported immediately and thoroughly 
investigated; and
•	 commanders have access to specialist legal advice.
Political considerations
3.18. JFCs may find that political realities, both national and multinational, preclude 
defining clear strategic objectives, either for the operation as a whole or for individual 
troop contributing nations.  In these circumstances they may have to derive their own 
end-state from the limited direction they have received.
3.19. Due to the challenges faced by national and multinational strategic decision-
making bodies, JFCs may spend a disproportionate amount of time managing their 
strategic links at the expense of time spent in their own headquarters or dealing 
with subordinate commanders.  This may be further compounded by the demands 
of hosting visiting political and military dignitaries to cultivate and maintain positive 
strategic relations.  
3.20. The requirement to coalition-build (advising, encouraging and informing 
multinational partners) and the need to manage crises by consensus in multinational 
and multi-agency operations, slows down decision-making.  It also introduces 
uncertainty, and places even greater time pressure on JFCs.  However, handling these 
114  F or more on campaign authority, see JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine .
JFCs may find 
that political 
realities, both 
national and 
multinational, 
preclude 
defining clear 
strategic 
objectives....
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   109 03/12/2014   12:48:40

110
JDP 01110
3
issues, including frequent visits by senior partners, is not just desirable, but a core 
feature of command. 
Command alongside other government departments
3.21. At the operational and tactical levels, each government department will 
monitor and conduct activity, including allocating manpower and resources, within 
its own area of responsibility.  Consequently, JFCs may play a vital role in helping 
to coordinate a range of competing priorities and to sequence activities.  Their 
headquarters may have to act as the focal point for an integrated approach in a non-
permissive environment.
3.22. The overriding consideration is to focus effort on achieving any national 
strategic aim and objectives.  Reaching a shared understanding of the situation and 
potential responses to it, facilitates the coordinated application of the instruments of 
national power, and retains the cultural and professional diversity required to address 
complex problems.
Command in a multinational context
3.23. A UK commander may find himself acting as a: 
•	 JFC on a multinational operation where the UK is the lead or framework 
nation; 
•	 UK national contingent commander where the UK is contributing forces to an 
operation led by another nation; 
•	 UK component commander within a multinational component command 
headquarters; or
•	 commander in an alliance/coalition appointment.
3.24. Operating multinationally, either as part of a formal alliance or an ad hoc 
coalition, introduces many challenges for both the multinational JFC and contributing 
nations’ national contingent commanders.  Regardless of the UK commander’s role, 
they should be cognisant of both perspectives.115  
Attributes of a coalition force commander
3.25. A multinational force commander requires political acumen, patience and tact.  
Their key challenges will include achieving unity of effort (although they may aspire 
to unity of command) and fostering organisational agility. 
115 A JP-01, Chapter 6 discusses the nature and challenges of operational-level command in a 
multinational context.
Multinational 
command 
requires 
political 
acumen, 
patience and 
tact.
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   110 03/12/2014   12:48:40

111
JDP 01111
3
3.26. A force commander should understand each national contingent’s particular 
strengths, weaknesses and political objectives, as well as its national ethos, history 
and culture.  They should balance capabilities and distribute the workload and risk 
equitably, so that no one nation sustains disproportionate casualties or receives 
undue credit, either of which may weaken the cohesion of a multinational force. 
3. 27. Common doctrine and agreed structures underpin unity of effort within an 
established alliance.  Ad hoc coalitions may have sub-optimal command structures 
and can be hampered by the range of national political aims.  Cultural or procedural 
differences between national contingents may also create friction and reduce tempo.  
A force commander may be required to accept no more than unity of purpose in such 
circumstances.
3.28. Initially, consensus and cooperation may be based on little more than an 
agreement on the art of the possible.  This should be developed progressively 
through mutual trust, understanding, patience and respect for national perspectives 
and positions, and promoted through personal and professional relationships 
between a multinational force commander and national contingent commanders.  
To improve their perspective on any national agendas and foster improved relations 
across the coalition, a force commander should invest time in engaging personally 
with any national political representatives who visit their area of operations.
3.29. A force commander should appreciate the linguistic and cultural challenges of 
multinational operations, recognising that it is their responsibility to communicate 
with all subordinates including those for whom English is not the first language.  
Commanders need to understand all contributing nation’s strengths, weaknesses and political objectives
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   111 03/12/2014   12:48:42

112
JDP 01112
3
Clarity and brevity are important, as is using simple English and defined terms, noting 
that even these may not translate directly into another language.
3.30. Force generation will be carried out at the military-strategic level, with limited 
consultation with the force commander.  So, what JFCs think they need to achieve the 
mission, may not be matched by the respective national force contributions.
3.31. The presence of international and contributing nations’ media, and the need to 
align national positions, is a further factor to be addressed by the force commander.  
A proactive and coordinated approach is essential.  Supportive media coverage plays 
a major role in maintaining the endorsement of both the international community 
and domestic audiences.  These are fundamental factors in maintaining coalition 
morale and cohesion.
Multinational command – organisational agility
3.32. The impact of multinationality on organisational agility is often significant.  The 
most fundamental impact is one of time and tempo; activities take longer to plan 
and execute, and maintaining high and common tempo is challenging.  Decisive 
engagement with an opponent (who may be more agile) is more difficult to achieve 
than in national operations.  While a range of factors may contribute towards a lack 
of organisational agility in multinational operations, the two most prevalent are 
interoperability and information management. 
a. Interoperability.  Nations will contribute a broad range of equipments, 
technologies, languages, doctrine and training to coalition operations.  While 
some alliances, most notably NATO, attempt to mitigate interoperability issues 
through standardisation, problems will remain.  Any lack of interoperability, 
which impacts on the principles of war or operations, will significantly limit the 
JFC’s plans.  JFCs will need to understand the interoperability challenges and 
ensure their operations design accommodates them. 
b. Information management.  Despite technological advances, the challenges 
of gaining and interpreting information remain.  In multinational operations, 
problems are exacerbated by the limitations and constraints on information 
management.  Many nations’ communications and information systems (CIS) 
are incompatible.  The constraints on handling and sharing information and 
intelligence also compound the difficulties faced by JFCs.  NATO’s information 
management requirements are addressed in the Allied Command Operations 
Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive and AJP-6.116
116  AJP-6, Allied Joint Doctrine for Communication and Information Systems . 
Nations will 
contribute a 
broad range 
of equipments, 
technologies, 
languages, 
doctrine and 
training to 
coalition 
operations.
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   112 03/12/2014   12:48:42

113
JDP 01113
3
National contingent command
3.33. Each national contingent commander is a key decision-maker in their own right, 
though none share the JFC’s authority.  A national contingent commander should 
consider the following.
a. Influence.
•	 Shaping coalition plans based on personal relationships.
•	 Advising JFCs on national capabilities and limitations (such as 
interoperability and rules of engagement).
•	 Identifying and managing levels of risk for national forces.
b. Direct.
•	 Exercising operational control of national forces, and directing/
approving their use in line with national direction.
•	 In close liaison with the NATO Joint Logistic Support Group 
Headquarters,117 de-conflicting, prioritising and, where appropriate, 
directing the reception, staging, onward movement and integration of 
national forces.
•	 Assuring logistic, medical and communications and information systems 
support. 
•	 Determining and coordinating national force protection policy and 
posture.
•	 Coordinating and shaping national media.
c. Support.
•	 Acting as a figurehead – building and sustaining national contingent 
cohesion.
•	 Providing legal advice.
117  I n a UK/France Combined Joint Expeditionary Force (CJEF) context this would be with the Combined 
Joint Support Group Headquarters.
Each national 
contingent 
commander 
is a key 
decision-maker 
in their own 
right.
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   113 03/12/2014   12:48:42

114
JDP 01114
3
•	 Facilitating strategic intelligence integration, and command and control 
architecture.
d. Inform.
•	 Determining any need for military strategic support.
•	 Reporting tactical and operational developments (including risks to 
strategic objectives).
•	 Developing memoranda of understanding and status of forces 
agreements with host nation(s) as required.
3.34. JFCs must understand the national political sensitivities of each of their 
contingents; any anticipated points of difference should be resolved early.  If a national 
contingent commander believes that an order is contrary to national interests, they 
retain the ability to veto it.  Political sensitivity over coalition operations and risk-
aversion in contributing nations’ governments both mean that the potential for 
national veto remains a key factor in coalition operations. 
3.35. National limitations on the JFC’s freedom of action can arise due to many factors.
a. Nations and their national contingent commanders may see their mission in 
different terms.  Some may perceive long-term reconstruction as the priority and 
others may prioritise counter-insurgency and its urgent security requirements.  
Time spent conceptualising is seldom wasted; it will help to reduce coalition 
friction and shocks.
b. The command authority passed to the force commander is sometimes 
complicated by differing national interpretations of command authority. 
c. The rules of engagement given to JFCs regarding using force may not be the 
same as those imposed by nations on their contingents.  Furthermore, different 
contingents may interpret the Laws of Armed Conflict differently.
d. Individual nations may have different outlooks on force protection 
reflecting varying attitudes to risk.  In some cases, JFCs may be constrained by 
having to provide additional force protection for a national contingent.
e. The targeting process, which may require agreement from all coalition 
members to each and every target, is likely to be written into the coalition 
mandate.
Commanders 
must 
understand the 
national political 
sensitivities of 
each of their 
contingents.
”
“
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   114 03/12/2014   12:48:42

115
JDP 01115
3
f. Nations place constraints on how to employ their forces, including 
restricting using national contingents to specified areas or types of activity.  
Some of these constraints may only come to the attention of a commander during the 
course of planning an operation, when issuing orders, or in reaction to events (such as 
casualties, an unwelcome task, or changes in public opinion).
A commander’s relationship with the media
3.36. The media has become 
so important in maintaining 
public and political support 
that a commander cannot 
disconnect himself from it, 
nor should they allow it to 
be the sole focus of their 
efforts.  Military operations, 
and particularly the senior 
commanders involved, 
invariably attract media 
scrutiny.
3. 37. JFCs should anticipate such attention, which may be highly intrusive, and 
prepare themselves and their headquarters accordingly.  They should be honest 
about their ability to deal with the media and carefully balance using a media 
spokesperson with their own appearances.  There are likely to be moments where 
the message is so important that they must deliver it personally.  Occasionally, the 
issue may be of such a critical nature that they may have to compromise operations 
security.  In every instance JFCs must ask themselves – who am I engaging, and for 
what reason?  They should not be overly passive in their dealings with the media, but 
should engage actively using as many channels as possible to persuade, rebut and 
advocate the message(s).
118 http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/education/resources/fifties-britain/lessons-suez.htm  
After the debacle of Suez in 1956, Operation MUSKETEER’s commander, General 
Keightley, summed up the over-aching problem of relationships with the media: 
 
           ‘The one overriding lesson of the Suez operation is that world opinion is now an    
           absolute principle of war and must be treated as such.’
General Keightley119
There are likely to be moments where the message is so important  
that the JFC must deliver it personally
Commanding the forceCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   115 03/12/2014   12:48:42

116
JDP 01116
3
•	 Command embraces authority, 
responsibility and accountability. 
•	 Exercising command includes the process 
by which a commander makes decisions, 
conveys their intent and impresses their 
will upon subordinates. 
•	 Different situations demand different 
styles of leadership, requiring varying 
amounts of regulation, delegation, 
inspiration and coercion.  
•	 Commanders should always be prepared 
to make use of the ideas and objections 
of others.  Good ideas are not the sole 
preserve of senior ranks.
•	 Mission command assists subordinates to 
understand their commander’s intent and 
their place within the plan. 
•	 Effective command, including the 
processes and systems that underpin it, is 
a vital component of delivering military 
operations.  
•	 Moral and physical courage are important 
qualities in a commander, at whatever 
level, although at the operational-level 
moral courage is particularly important.
•	 All military operations must be conducted 
within a legal framework.  The laws that 
apply will vary depending upon the nature 
of the operation. 
•	 The overriding consideration is to focus 
effort on achieving any national strategic 
aim and objectives. 
•	 Operating multinationally, either as 
part of a formal alliance or an ad hoc 
coalition, introduces many challenges 
for both the multinational JFC and 
contributing nations’ national contingent 
commanders. 
•	 A multinational force commander 
requires political acumen, patience and 
tact.  
•	 A force commander should appreciate 
the linguistic and cultural challenges of 
multinational operations, recognising 
that it is their responsibility to 
communicate with all subordinates 
including those for whom English is not 
the first language.
•	 JFCs must understand the national 
political sensitivities of each of their 
contingents; any anticipated points of 
difference should be resolved early.  
•	 The media has become so important in 
maintaining public and political support 
that a commander cannot disconnect 
themselves from it, nor should they allow 
it to be the sole focus of their efforts.
Key points
LexiconCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   116 03/12/2014   12:48:42

117
JDP 01
Lexicon
Part 1– Acronyms and abbreviations
AAP   Al lied Administrative Publication 
ACO   A llied Command Operations
AJP   A llied Joint Publication
CCT   c urrent commitments team
CDS   C hief of the Defence Staff
CJEF   C ombined Joint Expeditionary Force
CJO   C hief of Joint Operations
COBR   C abinet Office Briefing Rooms
COPD   C omprehensive Operations Planning Directive
COS   C hief(s) of Staff
CPT   c ontingency planning team
DCDC   D evelopment, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
DCDS (Mil Strat & Ops)  D eputy Chief of the Defence Staff (Military Strategy and 
   Operations)
DCMO   D efence Crisis Management Organisation
DFID   D epartment for International Development
 
EU   European Union
EUMC   E uropean Union Military Committee
EUMS   E uropean Union Military Staff
FCO   F oreign and Commonwealth Office
HMG   H er Majesty’s Government
JCP   joi nt contingency plan
JDP   J oint Doctrine Publication
JFC   J oint Force Commander
JFHQ   J oint Force Headquarters
Jt Comd   J oint Commander
JFHQ   J oint Force Headquarters
JFLogCHQ  J oint Force Logistic Component Headquarters
MOD   M inistry of Defence
MSE   mi litary strategic estimate
LexiconCommanding the force
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   117 03/12/2014   12:48:42

118
JDP 01
NATO   N orth Atlantic Treaty Organization
NSC   N ational Security Council
OCHA   O ffice for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
OGD   o ther government department
OLRT   op erational liaison and reconnaissance team
OPCOM   operational command
OPCON   operational control
OPLAN   operation plan
PJHQ   P ermanent Joint Headquarters
SACEUR   S upreme Allied Commander Europe
SHAPE   S upreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe
STRIDE    S trategic Regional Implementation group for 
   Defence Engagement
TACOM   tactical command
TACON   tactical control
UK   United Kingdom
UN   United Nations
VCDS   V ice Chief of the Defence Staff
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   118 03/12/2014   12:48:42

119
JDP 01
Part 2 – Terms and definitions
agency 
A distinct non-military body which has objectives that are broadly consistent with 
those of the campaign.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition)
analysis 
The examination of all the constituent elements of a situation, and their inter-
relationships, in order to obtain a thorough understanding of the past, present and 
anticipated future operational context.  (JDP 01, 2nd Edition)
area of interest 
The area of concern to a commander relative to the objectives of current or planned 
operations, including his areas of influence, operations and/or responsibility, and 
areas adjacent thereto.  (AAP-06 (2014))
area of operations 
An area defined by the joint force commander within a joint operations area for the 
conduct of specific military activities.  (AAP-06 (2014))
assessment 
The process of estimating the capabilities and performance of organizations, 
individuals, materiel or systems. 
Note, in the context of military forces, the hierarchical relationship in logical sequence 
is: assessment, analysis, evaluation, validation and certification.  (AAP-06 (2014))
baseline 
The criteria to which assessments of progress are referred for correlation.   
(JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition)
campaign 
A set of military operations planned and conducted to achieve a strategic objective 
within a given time and geographical area, which normally involve maritime, land and 
air forces.  (AAP-06 (2014))
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   119 03/12/2014   12:48:43

120
JDP 01
campaign authority 
The authority established by international forces, agencies and organisations within a 
given situation in support of (or in place of) an accepted (or ineffective, even absent) 
indigenous government or organisation.  
Note: It is an amalgam of 4 inter-dependent factors: 
•	 the 	perceived	legitimacy	of	the	authorisation	or	mandate	for	action;	 
•	 the 	perceived	legitimacy	of	the	manner	in	which	those	exercising	the 
          mandate conduct themselves both individually and collectively; 
•	 the 	degree	to	which	factions,	local	populations	and	others	accept	the	 
          authority of those executing the mandate;  
•	 and 	the	degree	to	which	the	aspirations	of	factions,	local	populations	and	 
          others are managed or met by those executing the mandate.  
(JDP 02, 2nd Edition)
campaign plan 
A campaign plan is the actionable expression of a Joint Force Commander’s intent, 
articulated to subordinate commanders through plans, directives and orders. 
(JDP 5-00, 2nd Edition, Change 2)
campaign rhythm 
The regular recurring sequence of events and actions, harmonised across a Joint 
force, to regulate and maintain control of a campaign.  (JDP 01, 2nd Edition)
civil-military cooperation 
The coordination and cooperation, in support of the mission, between the NATO 
Commander and civil actors, including the national population and local authorities, 
as well as international, national and non-governmental organizations and agencies.  
(AAP-06 (2014))
centre of gravity 
Characteristics, capabilities or localities from which a nation, an alliance, a military 
force or other grouping derives its freedom of action, physical strength or will to fight.  
(AAP-06 (2014))
command 
The authority vested in an individual of the armed forces for the direction, 
coordination, and control of military forces.  (AAP-06 (2014))
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   120 03/12/2014   12:48:43

121
JDP 01
commander’s intent 
A concise and precise statement of what a JFC intends to do and why, focused on 
the overall effect the Joint Force is to have and the desired situation it aims to bring 
about.  (JDP 01, 2nd Edition)
components 
Force elements grouped under one or more component commanders subordinate to 
the operational level commander.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition)
contingency plan 
A plan which is developed for possible operations where the planning factors have 
identified or can be assumed.  This plan is produced in as much detail as possible, 
including the resources needed and deployment options, as a basis for subsequent 
planning.  (AAP-6(2014))
contingency planning 
Planning, in advance, for potential military activity in the future.   
(JDP 5-00, 2nd Edition, Change 2) 
contingents 
Force elements of one nation grouped under one or more multinational component 
commanders subordinate to the Joint Task Force Commander.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition)
control 
The authority exercise by a commander over part of the activities of subordinate 
organizations, or other organizations not normally under his command, that 
encompasses the responsibility for implementing orders or directives.   
(AAP-06 (2014))
crisis management 
The coordinated actions taken to defuse crises, prevent their escalation into an armed 
conflict and contain hostilities if they should result.  (AAP-06 (2014))
crisis response planning 
Planning, often at short notice, to determine an appropriate military response to a 
current or imminent crisis.  (JDP 5-00, 2nd Edition)
current operations planning 
Planning to manage a current operation, to prevent escalation, and to sustain the 
necessary military activity to achieve the desired outcome.  (JDP 5-00, 2nd Edition)
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   121 03/12/2014   12:48:43

122
JDP 01
decisive condition 
A specific combination of circumstances deemed necessary to achieve a campaign 
objective.  (JDP 01, 2nd Edition)
desired outcome 
A favourable and enduring situation, consistent with political direction, reached 
through intervention and/or as a result of some other form of influence.  It invariably 
requires contributions from all instruments of power; it should be determined 
collectively.  (JDP 5-00, 2nd Edition)
directive 
A military communication in which policy is established or a specific action is ordered.  
(AAP-6 (2014))
force protection 
The coordinated measures by which threats and hazards to the Joint Force are 
countered and mitigated in order to maintain an operating environment that enables 
the joint commander the freedom to employ joint action.  (JDP 3-64)
framework nation 
Forces generated under a ‘framework nation’ are commanded by an officer from that 
nation, which also provides a significant proportion of the staff and support to the 
headquarters.  
Note: The framework nation is also likely to dictate the language and procedures 
adopted.  (JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition)
information management 
The integrated management processes and services that provide exploitable 
information on time, in the right place and format, to maximise freedom of action.  
(JDP 6-00, 3rd Edition)
information strategy 
Coordinated information output of all government activity, undertaken to influence 
approved audiences in support of policy objectives.  (JDP 3-80.1)
intelligence 
The product resulting from the processing of information concerning foreign nations, 
hostile or potentially hostile forces or elements, or areas of actual or potential 
operations.  The term is also applied to the activity which results in the product and to 
the organizations engages in such activity.  (AAP-06 (2014))
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   122 03/12/2014   12:48:43

123
JDP 01
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance 
The activities that synchronises and integrates the planning and operation of 
collection capabilities, including the processing and dissemination of the resulting 
product.  (JDP 2-0, 3rd Edition)
joint 
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and organisations in which elements 
of at least two Services participate.  (AAP-6(2014)).
joint commander 
The Joint Commander, appointed by CDS, exercises the highest level of operational 
command of forces assigned with specific responsibility for deployments, 
sustainment and recovery.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition)
joint force 
A force composed of significant elements of two or more Services operating under a 
single commander authorised to exercise operational command or control.   
(JDP 0-01.1) or (derived from ‘Joint’ AAP-6)
joint force commander 
A general term applied to a commander authorised to exercise operational command 
or control over a Joint force.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition)  
joint operations area 
An area of land, sea and airspace defined by a higher authority, in which a designated 
Joint Task Force Commander plans and conducts military operations to accomplish a 
specific mission.  A Joint Operations Area including its defining parameters, such as 
time, scope and geographic area, is contingency/mission specific.  (JDP 0-01.1)
joint targeting 
The process of determining the effects necessary to achieve the commander’s 
objectives, identifying the actions necessary to create the desired effects based on 
means available, selecting and prioritising targets, and the synchronisation of fires 
with other military capabilities and then assessing their cumulative effectiveness and 
taking remedial action if necessary.  (AJP-3.9)
lead nation 
Forces generated under a lead nation are commanded by an officer from that 
nation, from his own Joint Force Headquarters (augmented with Liaison Officers, 
and potentially staff officers, from across the multinational force).  The lead nation 
is responsible for planning and executing the operation, to which others contribute 
National Contingents and National Contingent Commanders.  (JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition)
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   123 03/12/2014   12:48:43

124
JDP 01
lines or groupings of operation 
In a campaign or operation, a line or grouping linking Decisive Conditions, and hence  
Campaign objectives, in time and space on the path to the campaign end-state.   
(JDP 5-00, 2nd Edition)
manoeuvre 
Employment of forces on the battlefield through movement in combination with fire, 
or fire potential, to achieve a position of advantage in respect to the enemy in order 
to accomplish the mission.  (AAP-06 (2014))
manoeuvrist approach 
An approach to operations in which shattering the enemy’s overall cohesion and will 
to fight is paramount.  It calls for an attitude of mind in which doing the unexpected, 
using initiative and seeking originality is combined with a ruthless determination to 
succeed.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
measurement of activity 
Assessment of the performance of a task and achievement of its associated purpose.  
(JDP 01, 2nd Edition)
mission command 
A style of command that seeks to convey understanding to subordinates about 
intentions of the higher commander and their place within his plan, enabling them to 
carry out missions with maximum freedom of action and appropriate resources.  (JDP 
0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
multi-agency 
Activities or operations in which multiple agencies, including national, international 
and non-state organisations and other actors, participate in the same or overlapping 
areas with varying degrees of inter-agency cooperation.  (JDP 0-1, 2nd Edition)
multinational 
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and organisations, in which forces or 
agencies of more than one nation participate.  (AAP-06(2014))
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   124 03/12/2014   12:48:43

125
JDP 01
non-governmental organisation 
A private, not for profit, voluntary organization with no governmental or 
intergovernmental affiliation, established for the purpose of fulfilling a range of 
activities, in particular development-related projects or the promotion of a specific 
cause, and organized at local, national or international level.   
Notes: 
1: A non-governmental organization does not necessarily have an official status or 
mandate for its existence or activities. 
2:  NATO may or may not support or cooperate with a given non-governmental 
organization.  (AAP-06(2014))
operation order 
A directive, usually formal, issued by a commander to subordinate commanders for 
the purpose of effecting the coordinated execution of an operation.  (AAP-06(2014))
operational analysis 
The application of scientific methods to assist executive decision-makers.  (AAP-
06(2014)) 
operational art 
The employment of forces to attain strategic and/or operational objectives through 
the design, organization, integration and conduct of strategies, campaigns, major 
operations and battles.  (AAP-06(2014))
operational level 
The level at which campaigns and major operations are planned, conducted and 
sustained to accomplish strategic objectives within theatres or areas of operations.  
(AAP-06(2014)) 
operations security 
The process which gives a military operation or exercise appropriate security, 
using passive or active means, to deny the enemy knowledge of the dispositions, 
capabilities and intentions of friendly forces.  (AAP-06(2014))
situational awareness 
The knowledge of the elements in the battlespace necessary to make well-informed 
decisions.  (AAP-06(2014))
strategic communication (in Defence) 
Advancing national interests by using all defence means of communication to 
influence the attitudes and behaviours of people.  (JDP 5- 00, 2nd Edition, Change 1)
Lexicon Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   125 03/12/2014   12:48:43

126
JDP 01
supporting commander 
A commander who provides a supported commander with forces or other support 
and/or who develops a supporting plan. (AAP-06(2014))
target 
The object of a particular action, for example a geographic area, a complex, an 
installation, a force, equipment, an individual, a group or a system, planned for 
capture, exploitation, neutralisation or destruction by military forces.  (AAP-06(2014))
targeting 
The process of selecting targets and matching the appropriate responses to them, 
taking account of the operational requirements and capabilities.  (AAP-06(2014))
theatre of operations 
A geographical area, or more precisely a space, defined by the military-strategic 
authority, which includes and surrounds the area delegated to a Joint Force 
Commander (termed the Joint Operations Area), within which he conducts 
operations.  (JDP 01, 2nd Edition)
understanding 
The perception and interpretation of a particular situation in order to provide the 
context, insight and foresight required for effective decision-making.  (JDP 04)
Lexicon
20141203-JDP_01_UKJOD_Prom_Hd_Doc_review_FMG.indd   126 03/12/2014   12:48:43

