[Page 1: No extractable text]

 

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) i
Joint Doctrine Publication 4-00
Logistics for Joint Operations
Joint Doctrine Publication 4-00 (JDP 4-00) (4th Edition),
dated July 2015, 
is promulgated as directed by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Concepts and Doctrine
Conditions of release
1.  This information is Crown copyright.  The Ministry of Defence (MOD) exclusively 
owns the intellectual property rights for this publication.  You are not to forward, 
reprint, copy, distribute, reproduce, store in a retrieval system, or transmit its 
information outside the MOD without VCDS’ permission.
2.  This information may be subject to privately owned rights.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)ii
Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for publishing 
strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine.  If you wish to quote our publications 
as reference material in other work, you should confirm with our editors whether the 
particular publication and amendment state remains authoritative.  We welcome your 
comments on factual accuracy or amendment proposals.  Please send them to:
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Ministry of Defence Shrivenham 
SWINDON, 
Wiltshire, 
SN6 8RF
Telephone:                  01793 314216/7          Facsimile number:      01793 314232
Military network:      96161 4216/4217          Military Network:        96161 4232
E-mail:        DCDC-DocEds@mod.uk 
All images, or otherwise stated are: © Crown copyright/MOD 2015.
Distribution
Distributing Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations (4th 
Edition) is managed by the Forms and Publications Section, LCSLS Headquarters and 
Operations Centre, C16 Site, Ploughley Road, Arncott, Bicester, OX25 1LP .  All of our 
other publications, including a regularly updated DCDC Publications Disk, can also be 
demanded from the LCSLS Operations Centre.
LCSLS Help Desk:    01869 256197
Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications (including drafts) are available to view and download on the 
Defence Intranet (RLI) at: http://defenceintranet.diif.r.mil.uk/Organisations/Orgs/JFC/
Organisations/Orgs/DCDC  
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

iiiJDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Abstract
Purpose
1. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations provides a 
handrail for planners to enable effective logistic support of deployed forces within 
joint and multinational contexts.  
2. Scope.  In outlining how a joint logistic framework can most effectively be 
emplo
yed, JDP 4-00 does not deal with component-level logistics in detail nor cover 
specific logistic functions.  Templates and aide memoires are included in annexes to 
offer a logical framework for further specialist input, providing guidance rather than 
detailing every question that could be considered.  Links are provided to relevant 
national and multinational doctrine publications, including more detailed logistic 
doctrine.
Context
3. This fourth edition of JDP 4-00 describes logistics at the operational level from 
a joint perspective.  Defence has changed significantly since we published the third 
edition and will continue to do so under the Transforming Defence initiative.  This 
revision has been informed by the Defence reform programme, generated by the 
National Security Strategy direction, the Strategic Defence and Security Review and 
Defence Reform Unit work strands.  This edition also reflects the direction from the 
Chief of the Defence Staff and the Permanent Under Secretary to place NATO at the 
heart of UK Defence.  Where appropriate, the results of these changes have been 
incorporated.
4. This edition of JDP 4-00 has:
• introduced new UK logistic principles, which are aligned to those adopted 
by NATO, and reflect the change from Logistic Process Owner to Defence 
Authority for Logistics (Chapter 1);
• refreshed logistic command and control based on the Defence Strategic 
Direction terminology (Chapter 2);
• introduced a new chapter on joint logistic enablers (Chapter 3);
• refreshed the logistic planning process, aligning it with NATO 
operational-level planning by reflecting the changes flowing from JDP 01, UK 
Joint Operations Doctrine (Chapter 4);

iv JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
• reflected the Whole Force approach (Chapter 5); and
• completed a major re-write of the previous redeployment and recuperation 
chapter.  The chapter is now titled Restoring combat power and incorporates 
rehabilitation, redeployment and recuperation (Chapter 9).
Throughout the document we have also incorporated multinational logistic 
issues and host-nation support, which were formerly allocated a separate chapter.  
This reflects the increasing importance of collective, and alternative, support 
arrangements to UK operations.
Audience
5. JDP 4-00 is designed for the joint op erational commander and staff.  Personnel 
within J1/J4 functional areas, and logistic staff in single-Service commands and 
Defence Equipment and Support, may find JDP 4-00 particularly relevant.  This 
publication is also the primary joint logistic doctrine publication for students at the 
Joint Services Command and Staff College and other Defence training establishments.
Structure
6. The publication is in five parts, each with a number of chapters and annexes.
a. Part 1 – Fundamentals.
• Chapter 1 sets out the principles and definitions that underpin the 
guidanc
e covered in this publication.    
• Chapter 2 covers logistic command and control for national and 
multinational operations, focusing on the operational level and 
emphasising the underpinning importance of logistic information 
systems to operational success.  The two annexes cover the respective 
logistic command and control roles of a Joint Task Force Headquarters 
and a Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters.
b. Part 2 – Prepare.
• Chapter 3 covers joint logistic enablers. 
• 
Chapter 4 provides guidance on the logistic planning process, including 
developing the sustainability statement and the logistic estimate.  The 
four annexes provide generic templates and aide memoires.

vJDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
• Chapter 5 discusses how logistic force elements are generated through 
a planning cycle.  This Chapter includes aspects relating to the Whole 
Force and contractor support to operations. 
c. Part 3 – Project.  Part 3 addresses the logistic aspects of projecting a force 
int
o theatre.
• Chapter 6 covers logistic support to deployment.  
• Chapter 7 provides detail on the reception, staging, onward movement 
and integration process.  Recognising the J3 lead of integration, this 
Chapter focuses predominantly on reception, staging and onward 
movement.
d. Part 4 – Sustain.  Chapter 8 covers how we sustain a deployed force.  The 
ann
ex provides an aide memoire of the planning considerations raised by the 
‘4Ds’.1
e. Part 5 – Restoring combat power.  Chapter 9 follows the force recovery 
phase of an op
eration from rehabilitation, through redeployment, to 
recuperation.  The three annexes outline the redeployment process and suggest 
logistic issues that may need to be considered.
f. Annexes.  Annexes A to C outline logistic procedures specific to the 
maritime
, land and air environments, respectively.  Annex D covers the Defence 
Equipment and Support organisation.
g. Lexicon.  Throughout this publication we ha ve only included terminology 
definitions and descriptions in the main text where they may aid your 
immediate, full understanding of the subject being discussed.  However, we 
have also provided those definitions, as well as others used in the text, in a 
comprehensive lexicon which also includes the acronyms and abbreviations 
used in this publication.
1 Distance, destination, demand and duration.

vi JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Linkages 
7. All supplementary publications, subordina te instructions, planning activity and 
training should be consistent with JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) and updated in-line with it.  
This publication should be read in conjunction with:
• NATO Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4, Allied Joint Logistic Doctrine (and 
subordinate AJP-4 series publications);
• JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine; 
• AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-level Planning (with UK national 
elements); and
• NATO Allied Command Operations’ Comprehensive Operational Planning 
Directive.
Other linkages are referred to throughout the text.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) vii
Contents
Abstract  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   iii
Chapter 1 – Overview  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1
Chapter 2 – Command, control and logistic information services  .  .  .  .  . 17
Chapter 3 – Joint logistic enablers  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  49
Chapter 4 – Logistic planning for operations  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 57
Chapter 5 – Generating logistic force elements  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1 13
Chapter 6 – Logistic support to deployment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 125
Chapter 7 –  Reception, staging, onward movement and integration  .  .   139
Chapter 8 – Sustain  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 153
Chapter 9 – Restoring combat power  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   167
Annex A – Logistics in the maritime environment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 195
Annex B – Logistics in the land environment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 209
Annex C – Logistics in the air environment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 219
Annex D – Defence Equipment and Support  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 229
Lexicon  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  233

[Page 10: No extractable text]

Overview
Chapter 1 introduces and outlines the:
• definition of logistics;
• logistic principles;
• Defence Support Network; and
• Defence Authority for Logistics.
Chapter 1
1
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
1
Section 1 – Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
Section 2 – Logistic principles .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5
Section 3 – Defence Support Network.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 9
Section 4 – Defence Authority for Logistics.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1 1

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)2
1
The line between disorder and order lies in logistics…
Sun Tzu”“
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 3
1Section 1 – Introduction
1.1. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations is the UK’s 
keystone doctrine publication for joint logistics on operations.  JDP 4-00 is aligned 
with the keystone NATO Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Logistics.1
1.2. JDP 4-00 provides commanders, staff officers and personnel with a handrail 
to help them understand how joint logistic functions interact and contribute to 
delivering effective and efficient logistic support to joint operations, both in national 
and multinational contexts.  We should read JDP 4-00 alongside:
• Bi-Strategic Commands’ Joint Operational Guidelines 13/01, Logistics;2
• JDP 1-05, Personnel Support for Joint Operations;
• AJP-4.10, Allied Joint Doctrine for Medical Support;3 and
• Joint Warfare Publication (JWP) 4-01, Logistic Enablers for Joint Operations.4 
1 Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4, Allied Joint Doctrine for Logistics  provides a common perspective 
for planning and conducting multinational joint logistic support for Allied operations to support NATO 
commanders achieve their mission.
2  To bridge the gap between AJP-4(A) and the delayed AJP-4(B), the two NATO strategic commands, 
Allied Command Transformation and Allied Command Operations, published Joint Operational 
Guidelines 13/01, Logistics in January 2013.  Though the Joint Operational Guidelines do not carry the 
authority of a ratified AJP , they provide a reliable indication of refreshed logistic doctrine beyond AJP-4(B) 
and we should read it in that light.
3  During 2015, Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 4-03, Joint Medical Doctrine was merged with 
AJP-4.10(B), Allied Joint Doctrine for Medical Support  to form a hybrid publication.
4 Joint Warfare Publication (JWP) 4-01 covers: water; fuel; operational feeding; air despatch; and power.  
This publication is being gradually reviewed; as those separate sections are completed they are being 
renamed and re-categorised as joint tactics, techniques and procedures publications (JTTP).
Chapter 1 – Overview
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)4
1
Logistics 
1.3. Understanding what logistics is varies ac ross military and civilian organisations.  
Informally (and in its very basic terms) successful logistics comprises having materiel 
or services:
• in the right quantity;
• in the right condition;
• in the right place; and
• at the right time.
1.4. On a more formal basis, Defence uses the NATO definition of logistics: 5
Logistics is the science of planning and carrying out the movement and 
maintenance of forces.  In its most comprehensive sense, the aspects of 
military operations which deal with:
• design and development, acquisition, storage, movement, distribution, 
maintenance, recovery and disposal of materiel;
• transport of personnel;
• acquisition or construction, maintenance, operation and disposition of 
facilities;
• acquisition or furnishing of services; and
• medical and health service support.6
1.5. Effective operational logistics is vital to conducting and sustaining any military 
deployment.  Logistics should be underpinned by robust logistic information services. 
5  NATO MC 0319/3, NATO Principles and Policies for Logistics, August 2014.
6  Though it is included in the ratified NATO definition of logistics, Belgium, Czech Republic, Germany, 
Hungary, Slovakia and the United States do not consider medical and health service support to be a 
logistic function. 
”
Effective 
operational 
logistics is vital 
to conducting 
and sustaining 
any military 
deployment.
“
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 5
1
Section 2 – Logistic principles
NATO at the heart of UK Defence
1.6. The Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) 2010 recognised NATO as the 
bedrock of the UK Defence.  NATO underpins the defence of the UK and our allies, 
while also providing deployable, expeditionary capabilities.7  Following the Chief of 
the Defence Staff’s direction to align with NATO as far as practical, we have adopted 
NATO’s logistic principles.  Those principles are:
• authority;
• primacy of operational requirements;
• coordination and cooperation;
• assured provision;
• sufficiency;
• efficiency;
• simplicity;
• flexibility; and
• visibility.8
We should apply them to provide the necessary foundation for assured, effective, 
efficient and coherent logistics in both national and multinational operations.  As part 
of a multinational response, we should, where possible, coordinate and explore all 
possibilities of combining support chains with other nations.  We can expect that, in 
an effort to minimise national support chains in Allied operations, NATO will look to 
deploy a Joint Logistic Support Group (JLSG)9 to de-conflict and coordinate logistic 
support to the deployed force. Figure 1.1 explores these principles in more detail.
7  D/CDS/3/1/5, Putting NATO at the Heart of UK Defence , 13 July 2012.
8  NATO MC 0319/3, NATO Principles and Policies for Logistic s, paragraphs 18-26.
9  AJP-4.6, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Joint Logistic Support Group .
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)6
1
Principle Description
Authority There is an essential interdependence between responsibility and authority.  The responsibility assigned to any NATO 
commander must be matched with the delegation of authority by nations and NATO to allow the adequate discharge 
of responsibilities in order to receive, employ, sustain and redeploy capabilities assigned to NATO by nations in the most effi  cient manner.
Primacy of operational requirement
All logistic eff  orts, from both the military and the civilian sectors, should be focused to satisfy the operational requirements necessary to guarantee the success of the operations and missions.
Coordination and cooperation
Cooperation and coordination across the full spectrum of logistics, including between the civilian and military sectors within and between allies, will contribute to the best use of limited resources.  Generic and standing pre-arranged agreements are the tools to facilitate logistic coordination and cooperation.  The overall responsibility for logistic coordination in 
NATO-led operations lies with NATO and should be conducted as a matter of routine under the authority of the North Atlantic Council.
12
UK logistic principles, adopted from NATO10
10 In a non-NATO context, we should read references to NATO or NATO commander as appropriate to a UK or coalition operation.
11 NATO MC 0319/3, NATO Principles and Policies for Logistic s, paragraph 17, August 2014.
12 Cooperation within, and among, nations is essential.  We should coordinate logistic support across the force, including with  all allies.
Overarching principle – Collective responsibility
Nations and NATO authorities have a collective responsibility for logistic support of NATO’s multinational operations.  This collective 
responsibility encourages nations and NATO to cooperatively share the provision and use of logistic capabilities and resources to support 
the force effectively and efficiently.  Standardisation, cooperation and multinationality in logistics and robust logistics command and 
control build together the basis for flexible and efficient use of logistic support thereby contributing to operational success.11
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 7
1
Principle Description
Assured provision Nations and NATO must ensure the provision of logistic resources to support the forces and capabilities allocated to NATO 
during peace, crisis and confl ict.13
Suffi   ciency Logistic support must be available in the necessary quantity and quality, when and where it is required throughout the full 
spectrum of operations and missions.  It must be ensured for any NATO-led operation continuously for the duration required 
to accomplish the mission.14
Effi   ciency Logistic resources and capabilities must be used eff  ectively and effi  ciently.  Requirements must be identifi ed and addressed 
in a timely manner to optimise the effi  cient provision, and eff ective use, of such resources and capabilities.  Therefore, from 
the onset of the operational planning process, NATO and nations must consider multinational solutions prior to deciding to 
choose national solutions.
Simplicity Uncomplicated mission-orientated logistics organisations, structures and procedures minimise confusion and help to ensure 
that the support provided meets NATO commanders’ requirements.  Additionally, clear orders, simple plans and reporting mechanisms ensure accurate and effi  cient dissemination of information and minimise misunderstandings.
Flexibility Logistic support must be adaptive and fl exible to be eff  ective.  Adequate planning allows NATO and nations to react in a 
timely manner to changes in the operational situation and/or requirements.
Visibility Visibility of logistic resources and capabilities is essential for eff ective and effi  cient logistic support and will be provided 
by NATO and nations’ logistic information management services, as required.  National and NATO logistic information services require a facilitation of the delivery of the right information, because NATO commanders require timely, accurate and relevant information to make eff ective decisions and to plan and coordinate logistic operations in the joint operations 
area.  Visibility of nations’ support arrangements (for example, lines of communication and transit areas) will assist NATO commanders in the planning for, and execution of, operations and missions.  The key to this information is visibility of logistic 
requirements, resources, capabilities and processes.  This visibility must extend across the multiple levels of management and command for NATO, nations and other actors and must provide the information required at each level.
15
13 Assured provision is required of all individual nations and Allied organisations.
14 We should ensure sufficiency for any operation the UK is involved in.
15 All UK commanders must have visibility within and across the deployed area.  Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) has issued policy direction on the use 
of Logistic Functional Area Services.
Figure 1.1 – UK/NATO logistic principles
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)8
1
The integrated approach
1.7. Alongside the logistic principles, an d the overarching principle of collective 
responsibility, NATO and the UK look to build on collective responsibility and 
cooperation in complex situations.  The UK has adopted the term ‘integrated 
approach’16 to reflect this.  While NATO uses this term in the context of the force, 
it uses the term ‘comprehensive approach’ in the wider context of UK’s integrated 
approach and describes it as the influencing of ‘complex situations’ through the 
application of diplomatic, information, military and economic instruments of power, 
and civil capabilities.17
1.8. NATO identifies activity at three levels that contribute to delivering a 
comprehensive approach.
• The political and strategic level – generating international understanding.
• The operational level – where cooperating with other international actors is 
ne
cessary in planning for complex operations where significant civil-military 
interaction will be required.
• The theatre level – where NATO force commanders must be empowered to 
c
ooperate and coordinate effectively with indigenous local authorities and 
other international actors.
1.9. How we contribute to an integrated (UK) or comprehensive (NATO) approach 
may vary from one deployment to another (as well as between phases of an 
operation).  However, the guiding principles are enduring and appropriate for all 
multinational operations.  The success of each approach depends upon several 
factors.
• Proactive engagement – before, and during, a deployment.
• Shared understanding – engendered through cooperative working, liaison, 
do
ctrine, education and a common language.
• Collaborative working – based on mutual trust and understanding to help 
of
fset cultural and organisational differences, a willingness to cooperate 
(born out of institutional familiarity), personal contact and information 
sharing.
16  JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine , (5th Edition), Chapter 2.
17  A JP- 01(D), Allied Joint Doctrine , paragraph 0226, December 2010.
”
“
How we 
contribute to 
an integrated 
(UK) or 
comprehensive 
(NATO) 
approach may 
vary from one 
deployment to 
another (as 
well as between 
phases of an 
operation).
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 9
1
• Outcome-based thinking – developed by actors working towards a common 
go
al (or outcome) and, ideally, mutually agreed objectives underpinned (even 
without unity of command) by a unity of purpose.
1.10. In the military context, logistics is end-to-end – from industry through to the 
frontline in an operational theatre or to a deployed force element, such as a warship.  
Logistics stretches across a network of nodes with multiple processes, through which 
personnel and materiel flow and services are provided.  There are also interfaces 
between stakeholders including: 
• MOD Head Office; 
• Joint Forces Command; 
• single-Service commands;18
• Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ); 
• Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S); and 
• industry. 
1.1 1. We continue to develop our logistic capabilities in order to deliver a Defence 
Support Network.19  The Defence Support Network is defined as: a flexible set 
of supply chains connecting points of production and use, ensuring the most 
appropriate and efficient use of resources across the Whole Force, maximising 
information and technology to assure logistic support to operational commanders.20  
Figure 1.2 (overleaf) illustrates the Defence Support Network.
1.12. The Defence Support Network consists of a series of linked nodes through 
which support is delivered in an agile manner, giving end-to-end visibility and 
control.  As the Defence Support Network and through-life support concepts mature, 
the network will reach further into tiered-support within industry and the joint 
operations area (giving increased control over resources).
1.13. The Defence Support Network depends on capable logistic information services 
to deliver assured logistic information.  This is fundamental to providing visibility of, 
and confidence in, logistics and is underpinned by the need for high quality data.21  
18  Navy, Army and Air.
19  The Defence Support Network builds on the Joint Capability Concept paper, Support Network,
3 March 2010.
20  Joint Operating Concept Committee paper, dated 3 March 2010.
21  For further information on logistic information systems see Chapters 2 and 4.
Section 3 – Defence Support Network
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)10
1
POE
Protection
Information
POD
Strat
ase
MOD
Manufactu
Storag
Whole
Force
Operations
Framework
e
Defence
Support Chain
Deliver & R
Industr
Threat
PO
E
P
O
D
t
a
s
e
M
O
D
Manufactu
Storag
Wh
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
W
 ol
o
 e
Fo
r
r
c
e
O
p
e
r
a
t
i
o
o
n
s
F
r
a
m
e
e
w
w
w
w
o
o
o
o
o
r
r
r
r
r
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
e
D
D
e
e
f
enc
f
f
 e
Su
p
p
o
rt 
C
hai
n
D
e
l
i
v
e
r
&
R
Industr
t
SS
SS
t
t
rr
aa
tt
ttt
DLOD
Training
E quipment
P ersonnel
Infrastructure
Doctrine & C oncepts
Organisation
Information
Logistics
Figure 1.2 – Defence Support Network
1.14. Defence support includes those support activities that maintain military 
c
apability at pre-planned availability, readiness and sustainability profiles through its 
whole life, and end-to-end.  Defence support comprises: 
• personnel support;
• logistic support;
• equipment support;
• computer information system support;
• infrastructure support;
• legal support; and
• medical support. 
1.15. Military and industry partners must each be encouraged to bring innovation 
and developments into Defence from the private sector, as part of the continual 
improvement process.  Defence must be responsive to these developments.  With 
Overview


JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 11
1
collaborative working, these developments could result in increasingly innovative 
support solutions.  This may be as part of the Whole Force,22 or as part of developing 
relationships with industry, supporting operational outcomes. 
1.16. Sustainable development technologies 23 are at the core of future support 
solutions.  As well as providing environmental benefits, incorporating these 
technologies presents logistic opportunities and potential financial savings.  Using 
more efficient and reliable equipment and platforms reduces transport, distribution 
and storage requirements.
Chief of Defence Materiel
1.17. The Chief of Defence Materiel (CDM) is the Chief Executive of DE&S and the 
Defence Authority for Logistics.  As such, CDM receives two letters of delegation 
from the Permanent Under Secretary (PUS) – one as a top-level budget holder and 
one as a Defence Authority.  As the Defence Authority, CDM is empowered by PUS 
to issue general direction with which other top-level budget holders are expected 
to comply.  This direction ensures logistic activities enabling wider Defence business 
are conducted on a coherent and consistent basis.  That, in turn, will maintain or 
improve overall effectiveness, efficiency and resilience, and ensure compliance with 
legislation and other external requirements.  To support this and promote coherent 
development and improvement of logistic functions and services, the Defence 
Authority owns the Defence Logistics Strategy and the Defence Logistics Plan. 
Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations)
1.18. Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) (ACDS (Log Ops)) 
supports CDM to deliver those responsibilities.  ACDS (Log Ops) sits within Joint 
Forces Command but has three distinct (yet complementary) roles, reporting on each 
to different heads, as outlined below.
a. Chief of Defence Materiel.  ACDS (Log Ops) represents CDM in MOD and is 
resp
onsible for delivering pan-Defence policy and strategy on CDM’s behalf as 
the Defence Authority for Logistics.  For the Defence Authority, ACDS (Log Ops) 
22  For further information see Chapter 5.
23  D/VCDS&2ndPUS/5/1/10 letter, dated 23 December 2009.
Section 4 – Defence Authority for Logistics
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)12
1
ensures the delivery of effective and efficient end-to-end logistic support which 
involves:
• establishing the logistic governance framework; and
• ensuring compliance.
b. Commander Joint Forces Command.  ACDS (Log Ops) is responsible for 
deliv
ering Defence logistic requirements and the Joint User for Logistic Enablers’ 
priorities and standards on behalf of Commander Joint Forces Command.  As the 
Joint User for Defence Logistics, ACDS (Log Ops) also ensures the joint logistic 
capability requirement is properly defined and coherent.  This involves:
• advising capability areas and si ngle-Services on joint aspects of 
 single-Service capabilities; and
• articulating the risk of unfunded capability.
c. Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations).  ACDS 
(
Log Ops) is responsible to the 3* Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff (Military 
Strategy and Operations) for delivering strategic-level logistic planning and 
direction to support current and contingent operations.
Governance
1.19. Logistic governance is controlled by CDM through the Defence Logistics Board 
in accordance with Defence Strategic Direction, the Defence Plan and the Defence 
Logistics Strategy.  Defence Logistics Direction augments the Defence Strategic 
Direction planning assumptions and provides greater depth and detail against those 
planning guidelines relating to logistic support and sustainability.  Though produced 
by ACDS (Log Ops), Defence Logistics Direction is issued by Deputy Chief of the 
Defence Staff (Military Capability).
Assurance
1.20. CDM provides assurance of the delivery of end-to-end Defence logistics through 
an annual assurance report.  
a. Logistic readiness risks (force elemen ts at readiness and force elements at 
sustainability) are reported by the single-Service commands, top-level budget 
holders and trading funds as part of the Defence Performance Framework.  The 
risks are reported via the capability, operations, standing tasks and recuperation 
(COSTR) inputs to the Defence Quarterly Performance and Risk Report (QPRR). 
”
“
Logistic 
governance is 
controlled by 
CDM through 
the Defence 
Logistics Board 
in accordance 
with Defence 
Strategic 
Direction, 
the Defence 
Plan and the 
Defence Logistics 
Strategy. 
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 13
1
b. ACDS (Log Ops) draws on the above inputs to produce the Quarterly 
Assessment of Sustainability Risk (QASR).  This provides a coordinated view of 
sustainability risks and shortfalls against the force elements listed in the Defence 
Plan as adaptive, committed and responsive forces.
Single-Service command logistic structures
1.21. Logistics for operations is directed through PJHQ and often coordinated through 
a deployed joint logistic command and control node.  If required, each single-Service 
is responsible for environmentally specific elements of logistic delivery to operations.  
Annexes A, B and C provide details of logistic structures and processes within the 
maritime, land and air environments, respectively.
Defence Equipment and Support
1.22. DE&S is the single Defence organisation that manages coordinated materiel 
support to Defence and the provision of supplies and services from the strategic base 
to deployed forces.  Liaison between DE&S and deployed logistic staff on operations 
is critical and is conducted through PJHQ.
1.23. Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM) sits within DE&S 
and focuses on mounting, sustaining, recovering and recuperating the force to, on, 
and from, operations.  For operations, DSCOM manages the effort on behalf of the 
owner, PJHQ, and reports through Chief of Materiel (Land).  Annex D provides further 
information on DE&S and DSCOM.
”
“
Logistics for 
operations 
is directed 
through PJHQ 
and often 
coordinated 
through a 
deployed 
joint logistic 
command and 
control node.
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)14
1
Key points 
• The UK uses the NATO definition of logistics: logistics is the science of planning 
and carrying out the movement and maintenance of forces.  In its most 
comprehensive sense logistics encompasses those aspects of military operations 
which deal with:
• design and development, acquisition, storage, movement, distribution, 
maintenance, recovery and disposal of materiel;
• transport of personnel;
• acquisition or construction, maintenance,  operation and disposition of facilities;
• acquisition or furnishing of services; and
• medical and health service support.
• Delivering logistics is end-to-end, underpinned by information and enabled by 
logistic information services which provide visibility and confidence throughout 
the support chain.
• CDS/PUS directed that NATO should be at the heart of UK Defence; we have 
therefore adopted NATO’s logistic principles, beneath the overarching NATO 
principle of collective responsibility.
• Defence support encompasses all those support activities that maintain military 
capability at pre-planned availability, readiness and sustainability profiles.  
Defence support embraces all the functions described in the NATO definition of 
logistics.  Defence support is enabled by the integrated, and end-to end, Defence 
Support Network.
• CDM is the Defence Authority for Logistics, responsible to the Defence Board for 
coordinating and cohering the logistic enterprise.
• CDM is also the Chief Executive of DE&S, the single organisation managing 
coordinated materiel support to Defence and the provision of supplies and 
services to deployed forces.
Overview

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 15
1
Notes:
Overview

[Page 26: No extractable text]

JDP X-XX (X Edition)
Command, control 
and logistic 
information services
Chapter 2 discusses logistic command and control for 
national and multinational operations.  It focuses on the 
operational level, set in the context of strategic-level 
command and control structures.  This Chapter concludes 
by considering the underpinning importance of effective 
logistic information services.
Chapter 2
17
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
2
Section 1 – Strategic-level command and control .  .  .  .  .  . 19
Section 2 – Logistic command and control .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 22
Section 3 – Logistic command, control and 
                       information services   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 29
Annex 2A – Joint Task Force Headquarters logistic 
                       command and control .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 32
Annex 2B – Joint Force Logistic Component command 
                       and control .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 36

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)18
2
Only a commander who understands logistics 
can push the military machine to the limits 
without risking total breakdown.
Major General Julian Thompson, 
Royal Marines
”
“
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 19
2
National and multinational logistic activities
2.1. Regardless of the nature of the operation, the primary logistic aim should be 
to provide effective and efficient support.  The highest degree of multinational 
cooperation and NATO’s overarching principle of collective responsibility24 should 
both be at the centre of all logistic planning.  A coherent, commonly understood 
logistic command and control structure, supported by logistic information systems, is 
key to enabling operational logistics.  
Multinational command and control
2.2. Multinational operations could see the UK involved in deployments alongside 
several countries or individuals of several nationalities.  This could be as part of a 
United Nations (UN) mission, supporting NATO, a European Union (EU) deployment, 
with the bi-national (UK/France) Combined Joint Expeditionary Force (CJEF)25 or in a 
coalition formed to meet the circumstances of the situation.  
2.3. For NATO operations, the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe 
(SHAPE)26 will develop the Allied strategic plan, with the Joint Force Commander (JFC) 
it has appointed.27  Planning is completed alongside the troop contributing nations 
to develop the contingency operation plans.  SHAPE, with participating nations, will 
direct and provide guidance to the JFC developing logistic command and control and 
24  The UK has adopted the NATO logistic principles.  See Chapter 1 for further details.
25  For more information refer to Combined Joint Expeditionary Force (CJEF) Concept of Employment.
26  The Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE) is the strategic-level headquarters of the 
Allied Command Operations (ACO), commanded by the Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR).
27  JFC is a term used by both NATO and the UK to refer to the operational Joint Force Commander, 
as distinct from the UK command organisation, Joint Forces Command.  Joint Forces Command is not 
abbreviated in this publication.
Section 1 – Strategic-level command and control
Chapter 2 – Command, 
control and logistic 
information services
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)20
2
subsequent force generation.  A joint logistic support group (JLSG)28 may then be 
activated.
2.4. Force generation.  When a NATO operation is planned, SHAPE requests nations 
t
o commit logistic forces through the Combined Joint Statement of Requirement 
(CJSOR).  Allied Command Operations (ACO) staff identify and address any shortfalls in 
logistic support (including theatre enabling requirements), after taking into account:
• nations’ logistic capabilities;
• pre-arranged memoranda of understanding;
• technical arrangements; and
• host-nation support.
ACO considers a wide range of alternatives to cover any shortfalls, including 
contractor provided services.29  
National command and control
2.5. UK political framework.  Whether for a national operation or a UK contribution 
t
o a multinational operation, government ministers exercise command and control 
of crisis management at the highest level, either individually or in committee.  Joint 
Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine provides greater detail.30
2.6. Defence Crisis Management Organisation.  The Defence Crisis Management 
O
rganisation provides the strategic-level military liaison with other government 
departments, allies and coalition partners, as well as with international organisations 
such as the UN.  Within the Defence Crisis Management Organisation, Assistant Chief 
of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) (ACDS (Log Ops)) is the lead organisation 
for logistic advice.  Figure 2.1 shows a generic, logistics-focused, UK command and 
control structure.
28  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.6, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Joint Logistic Support Group .
29  NATO Bi-Strategic Commands’ Joint Operational Guidelines 13/01 – Logistics, January 2013.
30  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01,  UK Joint Operations Doctrine , Chapter 1.
”
“
Within the 
Defence Crisis 
Management 
Organisation, 
Assistant Chief 
of the Defence 
Staff (Logistic 
Operations) 
is the lead 
organisation for 
logistic advice. 
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 21
2
National Security 
Council
Industry
OGDs
DE&S
Front Line 
Commands
SG
DSCOM
JFLogCJFSp NSE
ACDS
(Log Ops)
D Med Ops
Chiefs of Staff Committee
Ministry of Defence
JOA
DCMO
Strategic base
CJO/Jt Comd
Permanent Joint Headquarters
JTFC/NCC/COMBRITFOR
Components
Legend
ACDS  Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff 
(Log Ops)        (Logistic Operations)
CJO Chief of Joint Operations
COMBRITFOR Commander British Forces
DCMO Defence Crisis Management 
Organisation
DE&S Defence Equipment and Support
D Med Ops Director of Medical Operations
DSCOM Defence Support Chain Operations 
and Movements
JFLogC Joint Force Logistic Component
JFSp Joint Force Support
JTFC Joint Task Force Commander
Jt Comd Joint Commander
JOA Joint operations area
NCC National Contingent Commander
NSE National support element
OGD Other government department
SG Surgeon General
Figure 2.1 – Logistic command and control for operations
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)22
2
Multinational logistic command and control
2.7. Operations are likely to be joint an d multinational.  Multinational logistic 
arrangements make operational and economic sense.  As a first principle, before 
making individual national arrangements national staffs should explore all options 
to work together.  Multinational logistic arrangements for contingent operations 
are complex and need to be agreed (and processes established) in advance of an 
operation.31  These arrangements may include:
• appointing a logistic lead nation 32 to provide the logistic support framework 
for the whole force;
• appointing logistic role specialist nations, 33 where one country provides a 
particular service or commodity for the whole force;
• nations contributing to multinational integrated logistic units and 
multinational logistic units;34 
• other bilateral/multilateral agreements, including in-place memorandum of 
understanding; and/or
• NATO agencies, such as the NATO Support Agency (NSPA) 35 and the NATO 
Consultation, Command and Control Agency (NC3A), may support operations 
from within their area of competence, in particular negotiating contracts and 
host-nation support. 
31  In accord with AJP-4.9, Allied Joint Doctrine for Modes of Multinational Logistic Suppor t.
32  Logistic lead nation is defined as: one nation assumes overall responsibility for organising and 
coordinating an agreed broad spectrum of logistic support for all or part of a multinational force, 
including headquarters, within a defined geographical area for a defined period.  The logistic lead nation 
can also provide capabilities as logistic role specialist nation at the same time.  AJP-4.9(A), Chapter 2.
33  Logistic role specialist nation is defined as: one nation assumes the responsibility for providing 
or procuring a specific logistic capability and/or service for all or part of the multinational force within 
a defined geographical area for a defined period.  Compensation and/or reimbursement will then be 
subject to agreement between the parties involved.  AJP-4.9(A), Chapter 3.
34  AJP-4.9(A), Chapters 4 and 5, respectively.
35  NATO Support Agency (NSPA) can provide greater ability to achieve value for money on deployed 
contracts and should be used whenever possible.
Section 2 – Logistic command and control
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 23
2
Multinational logistic information services
2.8. In supporting UK force elements within a multinational force, we may retain 
our own joint supply area which would receive, hold and issue UK-specific stocks of 
materiel.  In accordance with the Chief of the Defence Staff’s and Permanent Under 
Secretary’s direction to put NATO at the heart of Defence,36 reinforced by ACDS 
(Log Ops), we should use NATO logistic information services to ensure there is asset 
visibility across the deployed NATO force and provide the Force Commander with 
decision support.37  Applications within NATO Logistic Functional Areas Services 
(LOGFAS)38 provide those information services.  When LOGFAS cannot be used, we 
must ensure we are able to exchange our national logistic information with other 
NATO forces.  Logistic information exchange requirements are therefore a vital part of 
the planning phase of any multinational operation.
National contingent command
2.9. A national contingent commander or Commander British Forces is appointed 
when the UK operates as a partner in a coalition force.39  Components then normally 
remain within the overall UK command system, although the national contingent 
commander may not have detailed planning authority over UK contingents 
embedded within larger coalition components.40
UK logistic command and control within a national contingent 
headquarters
2.10. The national contingent commander headquarters will normally have a J1/4/8 
cell41 to oversee UK logistic arrangements which may differ substantially from other 
nations’.  The J1/4/8 cell is likely to be responsible for:
• briefing the national contingent commander on operational logistic issues;
• interfacing with other staff branches;
36  D/CDS/3/1/5, Putting NATO at the Heart of UK Defence , 13 July 2012.
37  NATO and EU Direction to Nations to Use LOGFAS letter, ACDS (Log Ops), 11 November 2011.
38  Logistic Functional Area Services (LOGFAS) is due to be replaced by Logistic Functional Services 
(LOGFS) at a date yet to be determined.
39  Where components are highly dispersed and/or operating within different coalition command 
and control structures, national component commanders may act as de-facto national contingent 
commanders in their area of operation.
40  JDP 3-00, Campaign Execution  (3rd Edition, Change 1), Annex 1E shows illustrative multinational 
command and control arrangements.  JDP 3-00 will be superseded by AJP-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the 
Conduct of Operations  during 2015/16 and a revised version of Annex 1E may be included as an insert to 
the version published in the UK.
41  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J1 – personnel; J4 – logistics; J8 – resource management.
We should use 
NATO logistic 
information 
services 
to provide 
the Force 
Commander 
with decision 
support.......... 
When LOGFAS 
cannot be used, 
we must 
ensure we 
are able to 
exchange our 
national logistic 
information with 
other NATO 
forces.
”
“
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)24
2
• providing direction and policy to the deployed UK logistic command and 
control node and UK logistic elements of embedded contingents; and
• interfacing with coalition partners at the operational level.
National support element
2.1 1. A national support element (NSE) can provide the national logistic focus for 
the Joint Task Force Commander within a multinational operation.  A NSE may not 
be established automatically, as the requirement for it will depend on the size and 
complexity of the deployment.  For an enduring operation, a NSE is likely to be the 
follow-on organisation to the initial UK logistic command and control node and 
would remain for the life of the operation. 
2.12. The structure of the NSE will depend on:
• the complexity of the operation;
• the range of national logistic activities to be undertaken;
• the UK contribution and force laydown; and
• any requirement for the UK to act as logistic lead nation or logistic role 
specialist nation.
The UK does not have a standing NSE.  When required, a NSE will either be formed 
from a standing headquarters (with some augmentation) or be created from 
individual augmentees and tailored to meet the requirement.
Joint Logistic Support Group
2.13. Multinational operations (particularly in NATO) may require a Joint Logistic 
Support Group (JLSG) and its associated headquarters (JLSG HQ).42  The JLSG 
de-conflicts and coordinates the logistic requirement and support to the deployed 
force, optimising efficiency and effectiveness.  The JLSG is underpinned by the 
overarching principle of collective responsibility.
2.14. Joint Logistic Support Group Headquarters.  A JLSG HQ:
• 
is scalable, adaptable and task-organised to match the mission;
• coordinates logistic support at the theatre level 43 between participating 
nations, component commanders, host nations and non-military 
organisations; and
42  AJP-4.6, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Joint Logistic Support Group .
43  Theatre-level logistics is defined as: a collection of means, resources, organisations and processes 
derived from the strategic logistic level and utilised by the Joint Force Commander to support the tactical 
level.  AJP-4.6(B).
”
“
The UK does 
not have a 
standing 
NSE.  When 
required, a NSE 
will either be 
formed from 
a standing 
headquarters 
(with some 
augmentation) 
or be created 
from individual 
augmentees 
and tailored 
to meet the 
requirement.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 25
2
• tasks any logistic units, logistic lead nations and logistic role specialist 
nations, or any contracted logistic support assigned by nations to support the 
overall deployed force.
The core staff element of the JLSG HQ is drawn from either NATO Command Structure 
or NATO Force Structure headquarters.  The UK may choose, or be required, to 
provide manpower to augment the core staff element.  In normal circumstances, 
NATO does not expect individual nations to provide the core staff element of a JLSG 
HQ, except where they have an established responsibility for a NATO Force Structure 
headquarters.  However, it remains possible that NATO may ask a nation to provide 
the core staff element.
Combined Joint Expeditionary Force
2.15. Should the UK deploy as part of the UK/France Combined Joint Expeditionary 
Force,44 it is likely that logistic staff would be provided as the UK contribution to the 
Combined Joint Support Group (CJSG) and its headquarters (CJSG HQ).  Within the 
CJSG HQ, the balance of British and French staff will depend on the context of the 
operation.45
2.16. Combined Joint Support Group headquarters.  Similarly to the JLSG HQ in a 
N
ATO operation, the bi-national CJSG HQ will be task-organised and adaptable, with 
the intent that, wherever possible, the headquarters should have a totally integrated 
France/UK staff.  The CJSG should also aim to integrate and incorporate as many 
of the national support element functions of both nations as is practical in the 
operational circumstances. 
a. When established, Commander CJSG will have responsibility for the 
command and control of the logistic resources assigned to the CJSG to execute 
theatre-level logistic support.  Logistic control is the minimum command and 
control authority that should be employed. 
b. The generic construct of the CJSG HQ  is a scalable headquarters depending 
upon the scale and complexity of the task.  The headquarters’ size may range up 
to around 1 10 personnel (when including integrated national support element 
functions but excluding real life support and communications and information 
systems staff).
44  For further information, see Combined Joint Expeditionary Force Concept of Employment.
45  For example, whether the joint operations area is in a UK or French sphere of influence; whether 
either nation has already established lines of communication or supply routes to the joint operations 
area; or whether either nation is better placed to provide a class of supply for the combined force, may 
influence the nationality of the command group and some functional areas within the headquarters.
“The CJSG HQ 
should have a 
totally integrated 
France/UK 
staff and 
should also
aim to integrate 
and incorporate 
as many of 
the national 
support 
element 
functions of 
both nations as 
is practical in 
the operational 
circumstances.
”
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)26
2
UK command and control for operations
2.17. Chief of Joint Operations (CJO) is responsible for planning and executing 
joint, national and UK-led multinational operations conducted outside the UK.  CJO 
exercises operational command of UK forces assigned to a specific operation and is 
responsible at the operational level for the:
• deployment;
• direction;
• sustainment; and
• recovery of deployed forces.
CJO acts as each UK operation’s Joint Commander (generally delivered rear-based in 
the PJHQ) and may appoint a Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC) to plan and execute 
the theatre campaign.46
UK command and control for logistic operations
2.18. Within the Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ), a Deputy Chief of Staff J1/J4/
J847 directs logistic planning and activity on behalf of the JTFC.  Although deploying 
a JTFHQ would be the usual command and control arrangement for a joint operation, 
there is no single model for the command and control of logistic operations.48  The 
scale of the logistic command and control node is dictated by factors including:
• the environment;
• adversary activity;
• the size and shape of the force structure;
• the level of contractor capability required to support the force;
• friendly forces;
• time and space;
• security; 
• the type of intervention; and
• the overall operational requirement.
46  JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine , Chapter 2, Section 6.
47  The Deputy Chief of Staff J1/J4/J8’s responsibilities will include all elements of J1/J4/J8.  Further 
details can be found in: JDP 1-05, Personnel Support for Joint Operations , AJP-4.10, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Medical Support , Joint Warfare Publication (JWP) 4-01, Logistic Enablers (being revised into a series of joint 
tactics, techniques and procedures publications (JTTP)) and Joint Service Publication (JSP) 462, Financial 
Management Policy Manual  (Chapter 8, Overseas operational deployments).
48  See Annex 2A for further logistics-related detail on the Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ).  For 
fuller details on JTFHQ see JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine and JDP 3-00, Campaign Execution  (3rd 
Edition, Change 1) (until superseded by AJP-3, Allied Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations ). 
”
“
Although 
deploying a 
JTFHQ would 
be the usual 
command 
and control 
arrangement for 
a joint operation, 
there is no single 
model for the 
command and 
control of logistic 
operations.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 27
2
Figure 2.2 shows a range of models which could be used for deployed joint logistic 
command and control.
2.19. Simple intervention.  For a simple intervention, such as a non-combatant  
e
vacuation operation, the JTFC may elect to exercise command directly over 
assigned logistic forces through the JTFHQ staff.  In normal circumstances, for 
this type of operation, the core JTFHQ J1/J4/J8 staff will retain a high degree of 
centralised control of operational, theatre and tactical-level logistics.  However, 
though classified as simple in operational terms, an operation of this nature may still 
involve managing complex and demanding lines of communication.  The logistic 
49 Defence Strategic Direction (2013) (CONFIDENTIAL UK eyes only), Part 2 (paragraphs 5 to 8) and 
Annex C.
Operational defi nitions49 Logistic command and control 
node delivered by Remarks
Simple JTFHQ J1/J4/J8 or component 
headquarters.
To deliver logistic command and 
control, the JTFHQ may require 
augmentation.
For a simple intervention (such as a 
non-combatant evacuation operation 
or humanitarian assistance to a disaster 
relief operation) a single component 
headquarters (for example, maritime/
land/air/logistic) could provide the 
required logistic command and control.
Complex JTFHQ J1/J4/J8 or a Joint 
Force Logistic Component 
Headquarters (JFLogCHQ).
To deliver logistic command and 
control, the JTFHQ may require 
augmentation.
For a complex intervention, a 
JFLogCHQ may be established 
depending on the operational situation 
and complexity of logistic operations.
Enduring stabilisation JTFHQ J1/J4/J8 initially, then 
augmented to form a Joint 
Force Support Headquarters.
This may require the UK to create a 
national support element.
Concurrent operations JTFHQ J1/J4/J8, a JFLogCHQ 
and/or another component 
headquarters.
All deployed headquarters may require 
augmentation.
Best eff ort A JFLogCHQ supported by a 
logistic brigade headquarters.
The logistic brigade headquarters is 
likely to pick up residual taskings and 
support a JFLogCHQ.
Figure 2.2 – Possible deployed joint logistic command and control arrangements
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)28
2
complexity may therefore require a logistic command and control node distinct from, 
though subordinate to, the JTFHQ.  In such circumstances, individual component 
commanders50 may be required to discharge this responsibility. 
2.20. Complex intervention.  For a complex intervention, JTFHQ may lack the organic 
s
taff resources to manage and control the logistic effort, particularly when multiple 
components are deploying.  The JTFHQ has an augmentee manning list from which 
to draw additional resources to meet the need.  However, complex interventions may 
also require a separation between the operational-level JTFHQ and 
theatre-level logistic command and control.  A Joint Force Logistic Component 
Headquarters (JFLogCHQ) may be required if the scale or complexity of the operation 
exceeds the capacity or capabilities of the JTFHQ J1/J4/J8 staff.
2.21. Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters.  Deploying a scalable, 
t
ask-organised JFLogCHQ enables logistic support between components to be 
coordinated.  The headquarters has a dual role:
• looking forward, to provide logistic support to the components in theatre; 
and 
• looking backward, to monitor and influence logistic activities from, and in, 
the strategic base. 
While likely to be deployed in a complex intervention, a JFLogCHQ may also be 
required in a simple intervention if the logistic context is sufficiently complex or 
logistics-focused.  Annex 2B discusses the roles of a JFLogCHQ.
2.22. Enduring stabilisation.   An enduring stabilisation operation is usually preceded 
b
y a simple or complex intervention.  Therefore, it is likely the enduring construct 
will be formed around the in-place joint logistic command and control.  Over recent 
operations, Joint Force Support Headquarters has become the tried and tested 
model for providing national support to this type of operation.51  However, the actual 
joint logistic command and control node for any future enduring stabilisation, while 
drawing heavily on lessons identified from past experience, would need to apply 
them to the context faced.
2.23. Best effort.  For a national best effort52 operation, the UK would typically deploy 
a 2* component headquarters for each environment, below a single 3* JTFHQ.53  Due 
50  Maritime, land, air or logistic.
51  Introduced in Operation TELIC and developed in Operation HERRICK.
52  The likely scale of a UK best effort operation is described in Defence Strategic Direction 
(CONFIDENTIAL UK eyes only), Part 2, paragraph 8, 2013.
53  In a coalition operation, unless acting as the framework nation, the UK would expect to deploy a 3* 
national contingent commander with force elements assigned to combined component headquarters.
“
”
The actual 
joint logistic 
command 
and control 
node for any 
future enduring 
stabilisation, 
while drawing 
heavily on 
lessons identified 
from past 
experience, 
would need to 
apply them to 
the context faced.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 29
2
to the size and expected complexity of a best effort operation, it is likely that the 
joint logistic command and control node would require a JFLogCHQ, supported by a 
logistic brigade headquarters. 
2.24. The ability to capture, handle, process and present high quality logistic 
information54 underpins a commander’s situational awareness.  This situational 
awareness contributes to enhanced freedom of movement and improves 
understanding and informed decision-making.  The ability to deliver effective logistic 
command, control and information is essential for any deployment and must be 
considered at the earliest stage of the planning phase.  Situational awareness can be 
enabled through timely and accurate management of logistic information.  Logistic 
information should always be:
• the right information;
• delivered to the right people;
• in the right place;
• at the right time;
• to enable the right decision;
• to deliver the right effect; and
• achieve the right outcome.55 
2.25. Logistic information is provided by, and accessed through, a variety of 
software applications which together support end-to-end logistic activity.56  Logistic 
information primarily focuses on managing inventory and meeting materiel demands.  
The key is to provide the highest quality information that enables staff to minimise 
inventory holdings and reduce the deployed logistic footprint.  Regardless of the 
application which provides the information, the focus, in terms of planning, should 
always be on:
• the service that the end-user requires; and
• what decisions the information is required to inform. 
54  Including command systems and consignment tracking, materiel accounting and engineering asset 
management.
55  MOD Information Strategy 201 1.
56  These are being rationalised into a smaller number of joint applications designed to be generic 
rather than to support specific platform processes.  
Section 3 – Logistic command, control 
and information services
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)30
2
2.26. In an operational environment, logistic information, combined with operational 
information and intelligence, provides full logistic situational awareness.  This helps 
staff assess, plan and manage logistic resources in a coordinated manner.  Logistic 
information management is enabled by several supporting capabilities.
a. Network enabled capability for logistics.  Network enabled capability for 
lo
gistics57 enhances logistic information usage by providing and managing 
information in a timely and secure manner.  The capability enables better 
decision-making.  Network enabled capability for logistics is potentially a force 
multiplier and should form a fundamental element of logistic operational 
planning. 
b. Logistic decision support.  The recognised theatre logistic picture is 
c
oordinated by the deployed joint logistic headquarters as a means of delivering 
situational awareness across the deployed force.  The recognised theatre 
logistic picture should provide a snapshot of the logistic situation.  However, 
the commander’s critical information requirements drive what is also included 
(for example, sustainability statement levels or availability of key equipment 
types).  These critical information requirements will be met through information 
services and their enabling systems which include: 
• NATO Logistics Functional Area Services (LOGFAS); 
• Management of the Joint Deployed Inventory (MJDI);
• Joint Asset Management and Engineering System (JAMES); 
• Base Warehouse Inventory Management System (BWIMS); and
• Air Core passenger movements system.
c. Information infrastructure.  Information infrastructure is designed to meet 
op
erational capability requirements.  The Defence Information Infrastructure 
(DII) provides a single, integrated, coherent bearer for both static and deployed 
forces and supports the progressive delivery of networked enabled capability.
57  Includes hardware, software, processes and individual and collective training, underpinned by the 
development of a secure, robust and extensive network of networks.
“
”
Network enabled 
capability for 
logistics is 
potentially a 
force multiplier 
and should 
form a 
fundamental 
element of 
logistic 
operational 
planning. 
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 31
2
Key points 
• A coherent and well understood logistic command and control structure, 
supported by robust logistic information systems, is key to enabling operational 
logistics.
• ACDS (Log Ops) is the lead provider of logistic advice within the Defence Crisis 
Management Organisation.
• In multinational operations, national st affs should explore all options to work 
collaboratively before making bespoke national logistic arrangements.
• ACDS (Log Ops) has directed that UK forces use Logistic Functional Areas 
Services (LOGFAS) on NATO operations to ensure asset visibility across the Allied 
force, enhance logistic interoperability and provide the Force Commander with 
decision support.
• In NATO or other multinational operatio ns, the theatre logistic requirement is 
likely to be coordinated by a Joint Logistic Support Group.
• There is no single arrangement for national deployed joint logistic command 
and control.  The arrangement will be determined by the nature of the 
operation, as well as allies’ deployed capabilities.  For more complex or larger 
scale operations, it may include a Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters 
at the theatre level.
• On all operations, command, cont rol, communication, computers and 
information enable the commander’s situational awareness and inform 
decision-making.  This is underpinned by logistic information, enabled by 
logistic information services, and is critical to operational success.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)32
2A Operational-level logistic command and control
2A.1. The Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) is responsible for the logistic 
aspects of planning, deploying, sustaining and redeploying the force.  Figure 2A.1 
shows generic logistic command and control relationships.  The arrangements for 
the Special Forces component are broadly similar but on a smaller scale.  The size 
and complexity (operational and/or logistic) of a deployment drives the construct of 
operational logistic command and control and may lead to the discrete componency 
illustrated below. 
PJHQ
JTFHQ
JFLC
Land 
component 
logistic units
JFAC
Air 
component 
logistic units
JFLogC
Joint Force 
logistic  
component 
units
SF
Logistic 
support to 
each SF 
operation
JFMC
Maritime 
component 
logistic units
Legend
JTFHQ Joint Task Force Headquarters
JFMC Joint Force Maritime Component
JFLC Joint Force Land Component
JFAC Joint Force Air Component
JFLogC Joint Force Logistic Component
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
SF Special Forces
 Command
 Coordination
 
Annex 2A – Joint Task Force 
Headquarters logistic 
command and control
Figure 2A.1 – Operational-level logistic command and control relationships 
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 33
2A
2A.2. When plans are initially developed, PJHQ J4 produces the operational logistic 
plan.  During planning, PJHQ J4 ensures logistic issues are represented to:
• determine the logistic feasibility of operations;
• inform the Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC) where logistic vulnerabilities 
lie and where risks can be taken;
• exploit logistic strengths and minimise weaknesses arising from deployed 
force elements or assets, taking remedial action as necessary; and
• develop future plans, including provid ing the logistic input to redeployment 
planning.
Joint Task Force Headquarters logistic staff
2A.3. The Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ) logistic staff direct all logistic 
activity at the operational level.  Deputy Chief of Staff J1/J4/J858 in the JTFHQ sets 
priorities, monitors performance and shapes support for future tasks as well as 
considering overall Defence support (including medical, personnel, infrastructure and 
welfare).  JTFHQ staff rely on reachback for assistance and influence through PJHQ.
2A.4. Based on strategic guidance issued by PJHQ, JTFHQ:
• sets theatre logistic policy;
• establishes the logistic and movement priorities within the joint operations 
area; and 
• monitors the recognised theatre logistic picture. 
The JTFHQ will have discrete cells for: 
• supply;
• movement and transportation;
• equipment support;
• contractors on deployed operations (CONDO);
• contracted logistics; and
• medical support.
2A.5. Joint Task Force Headquarters logistic staff responsibilities.  Many support 
t
asks, such as the medical support chain, extend across the joint operations area, 
58  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J1 – personnel; J4 – logistics; J8 – resource 
management.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)34
2A
and beyond, as continuous processes.  To ensure resources are used effectively, and 
speed and flexibility are maintained as circumstances change, the JTFC must clearly 
define the roles and responsibilities within components’ relationships (including, if 
deployed, with a Joint Force Logistic Component (JFLogC)).  The JTFHQ logistic staff is 
responsible for managing this relationship.   At the operational level they have several 
further responsibilities.
a. The JFTHQ staff contribute to the military strategic estimate through the 
logistic estimate.59 
b. The staff configure logistics, including medical support, 60 in accordance 
with the JTFC’s intentions.
c. The staff also set the theatre logistic policy, priorities and governance 
structures.  This includes the auditable authorisation of high priority demands 
in accordance with current supply policy.  This function could be delegated to 
a JFLogC headquarters (JFLogCHQ) or national support element commander.61 
d. The JFTHQ staff also negotiate host-nation support and in-country 
resource provision (supported by civil secretary and civil-military cooperation 
staff).  Where no memoranda of understanding are in place, the MOD 
directs who is to negotiate and draft the over-arching host-nation support 
arrangements.
e. The HQ staff set the theatre policy for recruiting and administering local 
civilians employed directly to support the mission.
f. The staff manage and coordinate contracted logistics and theatre 
contractors deployed on operations.
g. The staff also coordinate, with PJHQ, the availability of scarce or crucial 
resources between components and allies, to avoid duplication of capability or 
effort.
h. With PJHQ, the staff set priorities for movement into, and out of, the 
joint operations area and the subsequent use, maintenance, repair and 
59  The estimates are covered in Chapter 4.
60  Medical support is covered in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.10, Allied Joint Doctrine for Medical 
Support (with UK national elements).
61  Writing the operational-level logistics plan, including policy in the joint operations area for 
common-user resources such as fuel, food and water, usually based on a logistic lead Service or even 
logistic lead nation.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 35
2A
redeployment of resources in-line with the campaign plan, including use of the 
military estate.62 
i. The HQ staff develop the recognised theatre logistic picture and report the 
logistic resource state within the joint operations area.  This includes collating 
reports from the component logistic staffs, including a JFLogCHQ if deployed, 
or receiving consolidated data for the whole theatre from a JFLogCHQ.
j. Finally, the staff coordinate the lo gistic requirements of other nations 
where the UK is the logistic lead nation for all, or some, aspects of logistic 
support.
2A.6. Prioritising support.  Prioritising support is particularly important where there 
are s
ubstantial constraints on the lines of communication, such as where access can 
only be by air, or where there are insufficient accessible stocks to meet the demands 
of all components.  With the introduction of the Whole Force approach, including 
industry and contractors in the planning phase from the outset is vital to ensure 
coherence and minimise risks and costs.  
2A.7. Theatre priority list.  The JTFHQ is not normally required to become involved 
in routine s
upply, other than to ensure that unequivocal policy on the standard 
priority system and codes is set and the sustainability statement level maintained.  By 
exception, where conflicting demands exist, the JTFC is required to advise PJHQ of 
the desired priority through the creation of a theatre priority list.63  PJHQ, on behalf of 
Chief of Joint Operations, will then direct Defence Equipment and Support to deliver 
according to those priorities.  
2A.8. Prioritisation information.  Prioritisation decisions depend on information from 
man
y sources, including the:
• end-user of the equipment;
• demanding component’s maintenance and supply organisation;
• demanding component’s operations staff, for relevance to tactical plans;
• other components; and
• strategic base, for availability and delivery issues.
Depending on the nature and volume of prioritisation requirements, the JTFHQ J1/
J4 staff may draw on expertise from a JFLogCHQ to coordinate information before 
working with J364 staff to establish the implications for the JTFC’s campaign plan.  
Effective asset tracking and visibility can significantly ease this process.
62  Covered in Joint Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (JTTP) 4-05, Operations Infrastructure .
63  The theatre priority list is covered in more detail in Chapter 8.
64  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J3 – operations.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)36
2B
2B.1. Theatre support to joint operations.  Effectively executing theatre logistics to 
s
upport joint operations requires a joint staff, coordination between single-Services 
and appropriate use of component logistic resources.  In some circumstances, that 
joint staff, or joint logistic command and control node, might be provided by the 
Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ) J1/J4/J865 or the logistic staff of one of the 
components.  Planners should, however, consider deploying a Joint Force Logistic 
Component Headquarters (JFLogCHQ).
2B.2. Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters.  Where the size, nature or 
c
omplexity of an operation requires, a JFLogCHQ may be deployed as the joint 
logistic command and control node (subordinate to the JTFHQ).  As a task-organised 
joint logistic command and staff organisation, the deployed JFLogCHQ would, most 
usually, be a 1* command.  However, the headquarters is scalable and could be 
organised and commanded at lower levels, depending on operational requirements.  
The JFLogCHQ includes staff from across the Services, with a broad range of specialist 
expertise.  
2B.3. Joint Force Logistic Component tasks.  The tasks undertaken by the joint 
lo
gistic staff, and the component as a whole, flow from the Joint Task Force 
Commander’s (JTFC) intent and direction.  Those tasks involve 
tri-Service coordination, while recognising that some low-level logistic systems would 
continue to operate between the components and Defence Equipment and Support 
(DE&S) in the strategic base.  The JFLogCHQ may have a range of units placed under 
its command.
2B.4. Deploying a Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters.  The decision to 
deplo
y a JFLogCHQ is made by the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).  While 
estimate-driven, a JFLogCHQ is the likely choice for enabling a new theatre of 
operations (except in the simplest scenarios).  The number of force elements required 
by the headquarters is likely to be most significant during the deployment, and 
subsequent redeployment, stages of an operation.  Task-organised component force 
65  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J1 – personnel; J4 – logistics; J8 – resource 
management.
Annex 2B – Joint Force 
Logistic Component 
command and control
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 37
2B
elements are assigned to the JFLogCHQ by the JTFC for specific tasks and are later 
returned to their parent components to meet JTFC priorities or other task allocation.
2B.5. Component logistics.  Component logistic staffs coordinate and develop their 
elemen
ts of the JTFC’s campaign plan, liaising with JFLogCHQ to ensure coherence 
with the joint logistic element.  Tactical-level logistic command and control normally 
remains within the combat components.
2B.6. Role of a Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters.  A JFLogCHQ provides 
a s
ingle joint focus for all logistic activity supporting the deployed joint task force.  
The headquarters has particular responsibility for the reception, staging and onward 
movement66 of force elements in the joint operations area and sustainment of 
the operation.  A deployed JFLogCHQ commands the theatre end of the Coupling 
Bridge67 and makes sure that force elements and sustainment stocks arrive in theatre 
in accordance with the JTFC’s priorities and are configured as required.     
2B.7. Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters responsibilities.  A Joint Force 
Lo
gistic Component Headquarters has a number of responsibilities which are 
outlined below.
a. Command all logistic assets and capabilities assigned to it by the JTFC.
b. Contribute to the JTFHQ J1/J4/J8 operational estimate process and liaise 
with coalition partners, deployed contractors, other government departments 
and non-governmental organisations.  If required, the JFLogCHQ may provide 
an early-entry reconnaissance capability via a logistics-focused Operational 
Liaison and Reconnaissance Team (OLRT).68 
c. Coordinate in-theatre logistic support in accordance with the JTFC’s 
priorities, including through activating and maintaining robust lines of 
communication.  Each component retains command of logistic assets deployed 
as an integral part of its units and formations, unless otherwise directed 
by the JTFC.  However, to ensure economy of effort and maximise logistic 
efficiency, integration and standardisation, a deployed JFLogCHQ is normally 
given coordinating authority over all logistic assets in the joint operations 
area.  JFLogCHQ may be assigned more than coordinating authority over some 
component logistic assets on a temporary basis when necessary.
66  From the joint rear area, a Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters (JFLogCHQ) would also 
support the integration element of reception, staging, onward movement and integration but that would 
remain a J3-led activity (see Chapters 2, 3 and 7 for further information).
67  The Coupling Bridge is described in Chapter 6, Section 4.
68  To reflect their greater, but not exclusive, logistic focus, such liaison teams may be referred to as High 
Readiness Logistic Teams in this context.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)38
2B
d. To establish and manage the recognised theatre logistic picture, as part of 
the joint operating picture, on behalf of the JTFC.
General functions of a Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters
2B.8. Theatre activation.  The theatre activation party is made up of specialist logistic 
and admini
strative experts.  Those experts conduct reconnaissance and implement 
initial in-country resource arrangements, preparing for a larger enabling force and 
a JFLogCHQ.  The size of the theatre activation party is driven by the specialisations 
required.  The party’s composition should supplement the range of skills contained 
within the JTFHQ reconnaissance team.69  J8 civil secretariat, finance and commercial 
staffs are likely to be included to establish regularity, propriety and value for money 
from the outset and avoid budgetary delay.  Theatre activation tasks include:
• identifying availability and suitability of host-nation support and 
in-country resource to develop clear planning parameters for both PJHQ and 
the JTFHQ and to secure approved resources;
• coordinating advance party reception, including transport, accommodation 
and life support;
• establishing a theatre reception centre to enable the operational locations of 
all deployed force elements to be tracked;
• operating as the advance element of a JFLogCHQ; and
• establishing systems for asset tracking and in-transit visibility, as early as 
possible.
2B.9. Movement control.  JTFHQ staffs set intra-theatre transport and movements 
p
olicy and priorities and, with PJHQ, those for inter-theatre.  They have a close 
relationship with JFLogCHQ staff, who conduct force reception and redeployment, as 
well as coordinating movements.  The Joint Movement Unit, which initially executes 
the movement plan, should deploy early.  The Unit may subsequently redeploy 
to support other operations as the JFLogCHQ becomes more established.  The 
JFLogCHQ should include, as a minimum, the following two organisations to conduct 
movement control.
a. Force Movement Control Centre.   The Force Movement Control Centre 
plan
s and coordinates in-theatre movements from plans established by the 
69  This could include: food services; fuels; host-nation support; labour resource; environmental health; 
movements; local resources/supply including military contracts staff; administration; port and maritime; 
and appropriate engineer specialists.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 39
2B
joint force movement staff.  The Centre is tri-Service manned and should 
include sufficient experienced staff to both function effectively and also 
to provide movements and consignment tracking command and control 
capabilities at key nodes.  The Centre maintains close liaison with the Joint 
Force Air Component Command, which commands intra-theatre air transport 
assets and the aero-medical organisation.
b. Force Movement Control Unit.  The Force Movement Control Unit groups 
tri
-Service theatre movements elements under a unit headquarters to better 
manage operational reception70 requirements at ports of disembarkation.  The 
unit is under the operational control of the JFLogCHQ.  The Force Movement 
Control Unit coordinates its activities with the units under JFLogCHQ 
command that provide:
• supply;
• transportation;
• port and maritime;
• engineering; and
• pioneer functions.
2B.10.  In-theatre movement and life support tasks.
a. Reception, staging and onward movement.  Reception, staging and 
on
ward movement is covered in detail in Chapter 7.  JFLogCHQ should 
maintain close liaison with the JTFHQ to enable timely and effective response 
to force element table71 changes.
b. Intra-theatre supply.  JFLogCHQ controls intra -theatre air transport 
and possibly main supply routes, although the latter are more likely to be 
controlled by the land component.  If established within the joint operations 
area, forward logistic sites are normally under the operational control of 
JFLogCHQ and the tactical control of the maritime component’s Group Logistic 
Coordinator.
c. Redeployment planning.  With JTFHQ and PJHQ, JFLogCHQ staff are likely 
t
o be responsible for planning recovery movement and preparing equipment 
and stores for redeployment and future use.  A separate organisation may, 
however, be formed to support post-conflict activities or transition to a 
subsequent campaign phase.
70  The unit also manages embarkation requirements during redeployment.
71  A force element table lists all assets, including personnel and materiel, that are to be deployed to the 
operation.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)40
2B
In each of the above, joint control is normally required to allocate transport assets 
optimally.
2B.11.  Forward mounting base support.  A forward mounting base (FMB) may be 
es
tablished within the operational area to support operations at forward operating 
bases.  Depending on the scale of the operation, the FMB may also provide some 
logistic support functions, requiring logistic command and control, communications 
and functional units.  It may also provide a hub for intra-theatre airlift.  Both the 
Joint Force Air Component and JFLogCHQ would, therefore, need to establish clear 
control arrangements with PJHQ to avoid compromising logistic capability in the joint 
operations area.  
2B.12.  Forward mounting base activation.  Responsibility for selecting and activating 
a F
MB rests with PJHQ, closely assisted by Defence Support Chain Operations and 
Movements.  Assets would need to be identified and allocated to the FMB.  The task 
of supporting it would only fall to the JFLogCHQ if it is geographically appropriate.  
However, the FMB would be a discrete element of the theatre lines of communication 
and the JFLogCHQ would therefore require some control over the FMB’s logistic 
assets.  PJHQ, JTFHQ and JFLogCHQ should carefully consider FMB support during 
planning, to make sure the integrity and continuity of support across the Coupling 
Bridge (and into the joint operations area) is maintained.
2B.13.  Logistic functional control.  Logistic functional control is defined as: th e 
authority to direct the method and processes employed to conduct logistic functions 
in order to ensure commonality and efficient use of resources.72  Commander Joint 
Force Logistic Operations coordinates a range of logistic support activities to support 
the joint force.  These activities include: 
• supply and distribution; 
• movements;
• maintenance and infrastructure; 
• providing fuel, water, electrical power, temporary deployable 
accommodation; and
• medical and personnel administration support.  
This support may be provided by: 
• the UK; 
• multinational military sources; 
• the host nation; 
72  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, United Kingdom Supplement to the NATO Terminology 
Database.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 41
2B
• contractors; or 
• other in-country resources.  
Delivery of effective joint support to operations depends on JFLogCHQ exercising 
coordination authority over all in-theatre logistic assets, as well as command of those 
units providing that joint support.  Task-orientated groups may be established as joint 
units, formed from assets, personnel and equipment from each of the components.  
JFLogCHQ also needs the capability to establish and maintain logistic detachments 
to provide essential logistic support functions for joint logistic units at dispersed 
locations.
2B.14.  Force supply and distribution.  Inventory control and prioritisation are 
f
undamental to operating the force economically and efficiently.  Routine individual 
demands do not normally pass through JFLogCHQ.  Supply and distribution units 
under JFLogCHQ command, and in accordance with JTFC’s priorities, are responsible 
for:
• receiving;
• storing;
• controlling;
• maintaining;
• accounting for; and
• distributing operational logistic stocks.
Using alternative support arrangements, such as contracting for availability, may 
increase support chain complexity and reduce asset visibility.  JFLogCHQ should 
monitor how effectively the Defence Support Chain operates.
2B.15.  Force supply and distribution priorities.  JFLogCHQ generates and controls the 
thea
tre priority list to ensure an operationally-prioritised flow of materiel to and from 
theatre.  Priorities for out-loading materiel are determined by JTFHQ J4 staff.  PJHQ 
directs the order of loading of these stocks from the strategic base through Defence 
Support Chain Operations and Movements.
Specific functions of a joint force logistic headquarters
2B.16.  Equipment support.  Equipment support is normally conducted by individual 
c
omponents.  However, the nature of the operation and the commonality of 
equipment and practices may require some resources within the joint operations area 
to be coordinated.73  The Whole Force approach will play an increasingly important 
73  Including military personnel, units and contractors.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)42
2B
role in delivering equipment support in theatre.  That support is coordinated by the 
JFLogCHQ.  The JFLogCHQ sets force policy for:
• repair;
• recovery;
• back-loading;
• cannibalising equipment;
• modifying equipment;
• disposal;
• salvage; and
• dealing with hazardous waste.
JFLogCHQ also coordinates producing the theatre mission critical equipment list 
(in consultation with other components and the JTFHQ) and manages the theatre 
equipment priority list on behalf of the force.
2B.17.  Medical support.  Medical support74 is increasingly joint and multinational 
in its delivery but roles 1 and 2 remain integral to each component.  JFLogCHQ has 
responsibility for controlling and managing:
• Joint Force Logistic Component role 1 and 2 medical facilities;
• theatre-level role 3;
• air and surface medical evacuation; and
• medical stocks, drugs and equipment provision.  
Depending on geography and the operational situation, some JTFHQ medical 
planning cell functions may be embedded in JFLogCHQ.  This provides better access 
to communications and greater physical proximity to the majority of medical units.  
However, those planning cells remain part of the JTFHQ.  Elements of joint medical 
support are provided by other components.
a. Ground medical evacuation and land-based role 3 support is primarily 
provided by Army Medical Services.
b. Constructing role 3 facilities for the land and air components is an Army 
engineer responsibility.
c. Aeromedical evacuation, whether conducted tactically from forward areas, 
or strategically out of theatre, is normally provided through the air component.
74  Medical issues are covered in detail in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.10, A llied Joint Doctrine for 
Medical Support (with UK national elements).
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 43
2B
d. Medical support to the maritime component is covered in 
Annex A.
2B.18. Infrastructure.  Using its infrastructure staff, JFLogCHQ produces an 
inf
rastructure development plan, as directed by PJHQ.  Infrastructure support 
includes:
• enabling main supply routes and sea and air ports of disembarkation;
• developing reception, assembly an d staging areas (including bases, 
headquarters and facilities to receive and cross-load materiel);
• providing utilities such as bulk fu el, potable water and electrical power 
generation; and 
• establishing technical and living accommodation.
2B.19.  Recognised theatre logistic picture.  The recognised theatre logistic picture 
i
s coordinated by JFLogCHQ to provide logistic decision support and situational 
awareness.  This is used by staff in-theatre and agencies throughout the Defence 
Support Chain.  The recognised theatre logistic picture contains force element 
and force logistic data, geospatial information and other logistic and operational 
documentation (such as signals, situation reports and theatre priority lists).
2B.20.  White fleet management.  Planning and conducting white fleet operations 
within the join
t operations area is generally coordinated by JFLogCHQ.  White fleet 
transport often forms a vital element in linking ports of disembarkation with forward 
mounting bases.
2B.21.  Reverse supply chain.  JFLogCHQ coordinates the return of materiel from 
thea
tre through the reverse supply chain, in close liaison with the Defence Support 
Chain Operations and Movements and Logistic Services organisations.75  Efficiently 
executing this function makes sure critical items are swiftly returned to the repair 
loop, availability is maintained and stocks kept to an appropriate minimum.
2B.22.  Urgent operational requirement management.  Urgent operational 
re
quirement-related materiel needs to be prioritised to enable its timely delivery 
and subsequent integration.  JFLogCHQ, Defence Support Chain Operations and 
Movements and industry maintain close liaison to ensure such materiel is delivered in 
good time.
75  Logistic Services was formerly known as Joint Support Chain Services and prior to that the Defence 
Storage and Distribution Agency.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)44
2B
2B.23.  Contract management and labour support.  Contractors provide significant 
cap
ability as part of the Whole Force.  The Whole Force size will change over the 
course of an operation.  JFLogCHQ lets contracts to provide services in theatre, 
in accordance with national contractor support to operations policy.  As logistic 
contracting activities can affect the delivery of campaign objectives, it is vital to 
coordinate with other staff branches (J3, J8, J9)76 and other government departments 
during the contract planning stage.  Local labour may also be employed in direct 
support of the Joint Force Logistic Component.  A cell within the JFLogCHQ 
undertakes this function, also ensuring that all personnel deployed to provide 
contractor support to operations are integrated into the force structure.  
2B.24.  Support chain performance management.  The effectiveness of the Defence 
S
upport Chain should be optimised.  JFLogCHQ oversees its function in theatre, 
identifies choke points and makes recommendations for resolving difficulties when 
they occur.
2B.25.  Provost.  In joint operations, Provost support across lines of communication 
should al
so be joint, and fully coordinated.  Provost assets may therefore include 
police from all three Services.  A Provost Marshal, and staff, may be established within 
the JFLogCHQ.  
2B.26.  Captured persons.  The JTFC is responsible for designating the Captured 
P
ersons Handling Organisation Commander.77  If that role is allocated to the 
Commander Joint Force Logistic Operations, it would be discharged through a 
separate branch or section within JFLogCHQ.
2B.27.  Force Postal and Courier Services.  JFLogCHQ will command the Postal and 
C
ourier Services unit deployed with the joint force.
2B.28.  Personnel and administration support.78  JFLogCHQ’s responsibilities in 
deliv
ering personnel and administration support include the following.
a. Administering the operational establishment table, with PJHQ J1 and J3, to 
ensure force elements are generated and deployed to meet JTFC’s intent.
b. Controlling and administering person nel arriving into, and departing from, 
theatre, ensuring the administrative aspects of reception, staging and onward 
movement are carried out, including:
76  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J3 – operations; J9 – civil-military cooperation.
77  JDP 1-10, Captured Persons  (3rd Edition), Chapter 4.
78  For more detail, see JDP 1-05, Personnel Support for Joint Operations .
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 45
2B
• operational location tracking;
• reception briefings; and
• administering the deployment welfare package.
Operational location tracking is required to account for all manpower in the 
joint operations area, including ship-to-ship movement of personnel.  At least 
one data capture team should be deployed to each port of disembarkation/
embarkation, as well as another held in reserve.  Personnel tracking difficulties 
are significant and, before deployment, the JFLogCHQ should develop plans to 
ensure the full and correct collation of personnel information.
c. Coordinating theatre policy for Joint Personnel Administration and 
maintaining force personnel records.
d. Maintaining a single point of contact for casualty and compassionate 
reporting.  With J4 Medical and the Force Movement Coordination Cell, 
JFLogCHQ is responsible for administering an effective system for managing 
and moving casualties and compassionate cases.
e. Managing theatre aspects of fatalities , including in-theatre coordination of 
repatriation.
f. Administering some aspects of theatre discipline chains, providing advice 
for convening official inquiries and staffing honours and awards submissions.
g. The Force Cashier is responsible for indenting, accounting for, and 
supplying, cash to unit and formation imprest account holders under the 
operational control of JFLogCHQ.  The Force Cashier is also responsible for 
supporting unit and formation pay and personnel staffs.
2B.29.  Environmental and operational safety.  A joint organisation responsible for 
main
taining the general safety of the force may be established to assist the JTFC in 
the managing environment-related operational risk.  The organisation is controlled by 
JFLogCHQ and should include elements responsible for:
• fire safety;
• environmental health;
• transport safety;
• environmental intelligence; and
• environmental policing.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)46
2B
The challenge is significant, especially when the force is widely dispersed across a 
large theatre, over several different phases.  The logistic estimate should consider 
how best to provide environmental safety.79 
2B.30.  Governance.  JFLogCHQ carries out the following functions in accordance with 
the c
onstraints, rules and procedures within the Defence Logistic Framework.80 
• Confirms that Joint Forces Command and the single-Service commands have 
effective governance procedures in place for their in-theatre force elements.
• Confirms that contract sponsors have effective governance procedures in 
place for the support and services delivered under host-nation support and 
contract support to operations arrangements.81 
• Identifies gaps between single-Service instructions and procedures in 
theatre to achieve safety and quality across components and specifically 
between individual units and multinational partners.
• Identifies areas where adopting joi nt practices and procedures would 
rationalise and/or improve single-Service process/system effectiveness.
• Engages logistic subject matter experts within theatre to provide process 
improvement proposals to operational commanders, at all levels.
• Reviews in-theatre incident and accident reports and takes action to 
coordinate process improvements when reports indicate boundary issues 
between individual units and/or multinational partners.
• Ensures that management checks take place in accordance with 
theatre-specific terms and conditions of service regulations.82
2B.31.  Civil Secretariat.  Depending on the scale and comple xity of the operation, 
the deployed JFLogCHQ may include a scalable civil secretariat cell covering the J8 
finance and commercial functions.  Relevant tasks beyond the scope of the deployed 
cell will be covered via reachback to PJHQ J8.
79  Joint Tactics, Techniques and Procedures Publication (JTTP) 4-05, Operational Infrastructure and JTTP 
4-05.2, Lands and Environmental Procedures.
80  The Defence Logistic Framework subsumed Joint Service Publication (JSP) 886, The Defence Logistic 
Support Chain Manual during 2015.
81  See Chapter 5 for further information on contractor support to operations.
82  JSP 908, The Defence Manual of Deployed Labour Support , Chapter 10.
Command, control and logistic information services

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 47
2B
a. J8 Finance.  Deployed civil secretariat staff may carry out following 
f
inance functions.
• Financial scrutiny and value for money assessment, including basic 
investment appraisals, before committing resources.
• Financially control and scrutini se all in-theatre operational 
expenditure, ensuring that financial propriety and regularity are 
maintained throughout.
• Manage procedures and systems wh ich enable collection, effective 
communication and recovery of costs for stores, services and facilities 
provided either directly to other nations, their personnel embedded 
within UK formations or to cost-sharing partner nations in accordance 
with established memoranda of understanding.
• Provide advice to commanders of UK deployed forces on applying the 
rules on gifts, rewards and hospitality.83
• Provide guidance on the use of in-place enabling contracts.
• Manage third-party claims from local nationals. 
b. J8 Commercial.  Deployed civil secretariat staf f may provide the following 
commercial support functions.
• Place contracts for goods and services in connection with the 
operation, ensuring value for money and demonstrating due regard to 
commercial rules, regulations and best practice.
• Provide commanders with timely and accurate commercial advice.
• Develop and implement commercial strategies for delivering goods 
and services, making sure that contracts are managed effectively and 
appropriate performance management processes are in place.
• Develop and maintain a strong commercial resource base.
• Assure commercial propriety and regularity.
• Provide advice and guidance on in-theatre sales activity.
83  JSP 462,  Financial Management Policy Manual .
Command, control and logistic information services

[Page 58: No extractable text]

JDP X-XX (X Edition)
Joint logistic enablers
Chapter 3 defines joint logistic enablers, describes where 
they are likely to be located and sets out their potential roles.
It also outlines logistic nodes that deployed joint logistic 
enablers facilitate in the joint rear area, including:
• joint logistic units;
• the joint theatre logistic rendezvous;
• the joint supply area; and
• the Theatre Reception and Redeployment Centre.
Chapter 3
49
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
3

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
3
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)50
There is nothing more common than to find 
considerations of supply affecting the strategic 
lines of a campaign and a war.
Carl von Clausevitz”
“
Joint logistic enablers

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
3
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 51
3.1. Definition.  Joint logistic enablers are: those for ce elements and capabilities that 
deliver the logistic effects necessary for:
• the successful mounting, deployment, reception, staging, onward movement 
and integration of a force;
• sustaining, recovering and redeploying a force across a Coupling Bridge and 
within theatre; and
• opening, operating and closing ports of disembarkation/embarkation.84 
Joint logistic enablers are required both in the strategic base and in theatre, mainly 
within a forward mounting base.  They are broken down into two discrete sub-sets – 
strategic base and deployed.
3.2. Strategic base joint logistic enablers.  Strategic base joint logistic enablers 
deliv
er the logistic effects necessary fo r the successful mounting, deployment, 
receipt, recovery and redeployment of a force out of, and into, the strategic base.  
They also enable the sustainment process across the Coupling Bridge to and from 
theatre.  Joint logistic enabler capabilities in the strategic base are primarily Defence 
Equipment and Support-delivered (for example, Defence Support Chain Operations 
and Movements, storage and distribution, mounting and recovery) but some are also 
delivered via single-Services (for example, air and sea ports of embarkation and the 
Joint Air Mounting Centre). 
3.3. Deployed joint logistic enablers.   Deployed joint logistic enablers deliver the 
lo
gistic effects necessary for successfully:
• opening, operating and closing theatre ports of disembarkation/ 
embarkation; 
• deploying from forward mounting bases;
• receiving, staging, onward movi ng and integrating the Whole Force;
• sustaining the force in theatre; 
• transitioning to stabilisation operations; 
• drawing the theatre down; and 
• redeploying the force from theatre.
84  Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) (ACDS (Log Ops)), Delivering Joint Logistics 
Post Joint Forces Command Full Operating Capability Study , 1 July 2013.  Proposed definition for inclusion in 
Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, United Kingdom Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database .
Chapter 3 – Joint logistic 
enablers
Joint logistic 
enabler 
capabilities in 
the strategic 
base are 
primarily 
Defence 
Equipment 
and Support-
delivered but 
some are also 
delivered via 
single-Services.
”
“
Joint logistic enablers

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
3
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)52
3.4. Types of joint logistic enabler.   Force elements that are able to deliver the 
deplo
yed joint logistic enabler function(s) can be further categorised into two types.
• Type 1 – organisations or units that solely (or by a large majority) provide or 
s
upport joint logistic effect.
• Type 2 – organisations or units that are attributed to deliver single-
en
vironment logistic effect but which can be task-organised to provide joint 
logistic effect.
3.5. Logistic nodes.  Deployed joint logistic enablers will establish logistic nodes 
to f
acilitate activating theatre entry and establishing the Coupling Bridge85 within 
the joint rear area.  Figure 3.1 shows a generic laydown of the various logistic nodes 
forming the joint rear area.  Under command of the theatre logistic headquarters (for 
example, Joint Task Force Headquarters  J1/J4/J886 or Joint Force Logistic Component 
Headquarters (JFLogCHQ)), the nodes include air, rail and sea ports of disembarkation 
(Type 1 joint logistic enablers), the joint supply area, theatre rendezvous and forward 
logistic sites (Type 2 joint logistic enablers). 
Joint logistic unit
3.6. A joint logistic unit is a headquarters or command and control node for logistic 
enablers which operate logistic nodes at the air and sea ports of disembarkation, joint 
theatre logistic rendezvous and joint supply area.  The size and construct of each joint 
logistic unit is tailored to the operational requirement.  The units can be augmented 
for operational peak or surge activities. 
3.7. The joint logistic unit’s main function is to develop and execute an effective 
support plan that meets the needs of those that operate within the joint rear area.  
Each joint logistic unit reports into the theatre logistic headquarters (usually Joint 
Task Force Headquarters J1/J4/J8 or JFLogCHQ) on how the deployment into theatre is 
progressing and on the state of our sustainment holdings. 
Joint theatre logistic rendezvous
3.8. The joint theatre logistic rendezvous conducts consignment tracking and 
maintains visibility of all stock entering the joint rear area.  Supply personnel are likely 
to operate the rendezvous but they are commanded by a dedicated, scalable joint 
logistic unit. 
85  The Coupling Bridge is described in Chapter 6, Section 4.
86  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches. J1 – personnel; J4 – logistics; J8 – resource management.
”
“
The size and 
construct of 
each joint 
logistic unit is 
tailored to the 
operational 
requirement.
Joint logistic enablers

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
3
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 53
Coupling Bridge
Legend
ACC Air Component Command
ACSSU Air combat service support unit
AFSUP Afloat support
ALSS Advanced logistic support site
Amph Sp Amphibious support
APOD Air port of disembarkation
APOE Air port of embarkation
BSG Brigade support group
C2 Command and control
CAOC Combined Air Operations Centre
CSC Convoy support centre
DE&S Defence Equipment and Support
DOB FJ Deployment operating base fast jet
DOB Strat Strategic deployment operating base
EAG Expeditionary air group
EAW Expeditionary air wing
FLS Forward logistic site
FSA Forward supply area
FSG Forward support group
GLC Group Logistic Coordinator
JLU Joint logistic unit
JSA Joint supply area
JTL RV Joint theatre logistic rendezvous
LCC Land Component Command
LCSG Land component support group
MCC Maritime Component Command
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
RPOD Rail port of disembarkation
RPOE Rail port of embarkation
SPOD Sea port of disembarkation
SPOE Sea port of embarkation
VS Bde VANGUARD Support Brigade
JTL
RV CSC
ACSSU
CSC
FLS
ALSS
JSA LCSG
FSG
BSG Manoeuvre 
Bde UnitsSPOE
RPOE
APOE
SPOD
RPOD
APOD
PJHQ
Joint 
Log C2
VS Bde
Manoeuvre 
Bde
LCC
MCC
ACC
Joint rear area
Purple Gate
DE&S 
Industry
JLU
JLU
JLU
JLU
FSA
EAW
DOB 
Strat EAG HQ
CAOC
DOB FJ
DOB FJ
EAW
Task Group
GLCAFSUP
Amph Sp
3.9. The joint theatre logistic rendezvous may be required to separate out bulk 
stores, reorganise them into consignments for their intended units or sub-units and 
prepare them for onward transportation.  To enable a clear picture of how stock is 
progressing through the supply chain, it is vital that the rendezvous is linked into the 
network of logistic information systems.  
87  Stocks could be deployed from the strategic base directly to the components and not be receipted 
in the joint supply area.
Figure 3.1 – Generic theatre laydown of logistic nodes87
Joint logistic enablers

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
3
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)54
3.10. The joint theatre logistic rendezvous is also an important element in supporting 
an efficient reverse supply chain.  As well as tracking consignments, rendezvous 
personnel can prepare, consolidate and package stores for movement back across the 
Coupling Bridge to the strategic base.
Joint supply area
3.1 1. The joint supply area is only established if the operational circumstances require 
it.88  The joint supply area’s main role is to receive and store theatre stocks and 
materiel in the joint rear area, for redistribution when required.89  Logistic capabilities 
are centrally marshalled to use limited supply and distribution resources effectively.  
The joint supply area is commanded by a scalable joint logistic unit and needs 
networked logistic information systems. 
3.12. Stock held in the joint supply area (though often intended for a single 
component’s use) will remain the deployed joint logistic headquarters’ responsibility 
until the Joint Task Force Commander’s priorities require it to be transferred to 
that single component.  The deployed joint logistic headquarters is responsible for 
ensuring that stock levels within the joint supply area are maintained in accordance 
with the sustainability statement.90
Theatre Reception and Redeployment Centre
3.13. The Theatre Reception and Redeployment Centre is initially located at one 
or more of the ports of disembarkation but, as the theatre matures, is usually 
consolidated into a single location.  Each Centre is commanded by its respective port 
of disembarkation joint logistic unit.
3.14. The Theatre Reception and Redeployment Centre’s main role is to register 
personnel as they arrive in theatre and provide initial orientation briefs, orders, passes 
and other administrative services.  Personnel are fed, accommodated and enabled 
to take control of their units’ equipment and vehicles which may have deployed 
separately.  Personnel are also given the opportunity to conduct limited training and 
range work (for example, to prepare personal weapons) and receive an initial issue of 
consumable supplies. 
3.15. The Theatre Reception and Redeployment Centre can assist with redeploying 
a force and should be considered in the initial deployment and redeployment 
planning.  The Centre can be supported by a temporary holding facility which 
supports deployed personnel operating within or around the port of disembarkation 
areas.  Temporary holding facilities may need to endure to provide a holding area for 
88  Alternatively, stores could be receipted into a single component storage area.
89  The joint supply area could also cross the littoral interface and include the joint sea base.
90  Chapters 4 and 8 provide more detail on the sustainability statement.
“
Stock held in 
the joint supply 
area will remain 
the deployed 
joint logistic 
headquarters’ 
responsibility 
until the Joint 
Task Force 
Commander’s 
priorities 
require it to be 
transferred to a 
component. 
”
Joint logistic enablers

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
3
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 55
reinforcements, particularly during surge periods.  Temporary holding facilities should 
also be able to provide stocks (predominantly ammunition (Class V)) prior to onward 
movement within the theatre.  Temporary holding facilities should not be confused 
with detainee holding areas. 
3.16. Capability management of joint logistic enablers.  D efence Reform 91 and 
the Strategic Defence and Security Review 2010 generated changes to capability 
management.  As a result, Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) 
provides a capability management function for those joint logistic enablers not 
managed either elsewhere in Joint Forces Command or by a single-Service command. 
91  Defence Reform – An Independent Report into the Structure and Management of the Ministry of Defence , 
[Lord Levene of Portsoken  et al], June 2011.
Key points 
• Joint logistic enablers deliver logistic effe ct for: the mounting, deployment, reception, 
staging, onward movement and integration of a force; sustaining, recovering and 
redeploying a force within and out of theatre; and opening, operating and closing 
ports of disembarkation or embarkation.
• They are broken down into two discrete sub-sets – strategic base and deployed.  
Within that they are further distinguished by type.  Type 1 – those that mainly 
provide or support joint logistic effect.  Type 2 – those attributed to deliver single 
environment logistic effect but which are able to provide joint logistic effect.
• Joint logistic enablers establish a range of logistic nodes from which they deliver 
enabling effect in the joint rear area.
• Joint logistic units provide command an d control for the joint logistic enabler 
operating each logistic node.
• The joint theatre logistic rendezvous cond ucts consignment tracking and maintains 
visibility of all stock entering the joint rear area.
• The joint supply area receives and stores theatre stocks and materiel in the joint rear 
area, for redistribution when required.
• The Theatre Reception and Redeployment Cent re registers personnel as they arrive in 
theatre and provides initial orientation briefs, orders, passes and other administrative 
paperwork. 
Joint logistic enablers

[Page 66: No extractable text]

Logistic planning for 
operations
Chapter 4, Section 1 introduces the planning process and 
sets the context for the rest of the chapter.
Section 2 outlines logistic input to the planning process 
from the strategic level in MOD to the operational level in 
deployed headquarters.  It introduces:
• the key logistic organisations involved in the 
  planning process;
• the points at, and the manner in, which they 
  engage; and
• the major planning products that they develop or 
  contribute to.
Section 3 discusses the importance of integrating 
logistic information system planning into the operational 
planning process from the earliest stages.
Chapter 4
57
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
Section 1 – Planning process.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 59
Section 2 – Logistic input to the planning process  .  .  .  .  . 61
Section 3 – Logistic information planning   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 68
Annex 4A – Generic logistic annex to CDS’ Directive .  .  .  . 72
Annex 4B – Generic sustainability statement.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 75
Annex 4C – Aide memoire for logistic input to the 
                       operational estimate .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 85
Annex 4D – Consideration of factors aide memoire.  .  .  .  .  .91

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)58
As we select our forces and plan our operations, 
... (w)e must understand how logistics can impact 
on our concepts of operation ... Commanders 
must base all their concepts of operations on 
what they know they can do logistically.
Lieutenant General Alfred M. Gray, Jr., 
United States Marine Corps
”
“
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 59
4.1. Our logistic principles emphasise how important it is to include logistic 
planning as an integral part of, and not in parallel to, planning for operations.  When 
considering logistic support for an operation, strategic and operational planners must 
take a Whole Force perspective, addressing the constraints and opportunity of using 
industry and contractorised capability to enable and support the operation.  
4.2. The UK planning process is addres sed through Joint Doctrine Publication 
(JDP) 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine.  JDP 01 refers to further detail in Allied Joint 
Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-level Planning (with UK 
national elements) and Allied Command Operations’ Comprehensive Operations 
Planning Directive (COPD).  UK national and multinational strategic and operational 
planning is conducted using the NATO operations planning process, operational-level 
planning process and operational estimate, in accordance with JDP 01, AJP-5 and 
COPD.92
4.3. As part of a multinational and/or integrated approach to address crisis 
prevention, containment and resolution, the MOD’s Defence Crisis Management 
Organisation conducts three types of planning.93
a. Crisis response planning – to determine, often at short notice, an 
ap
propriate military response to a current or imminent crisis.
b. Contingency planning – based on a mixture of intelligence and assumptions 
re
garding potential involvement in future crises.
c. Current operations – planning to manage a current operation, prevent 
es
calation and sustain military activity.  Such planning tends to follow crisis 
response planning, when military activity is (or is envisaged to be) prolonged.  
It may also involve elements of contingency planning to address potential 
changes in the situation, including termination or transition in anticipation of 
achieving the desired, or acceptable, outcome.
92  Staff planners should follow the planning process set out in the Comprehensive Operations Planning 
Directive (COPD), while taking doctrinal guidance from Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine 
for Operational-level Planning  and Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine .
93  JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine , Chapter 2.
Section 1 – Planning process
Chapter 4 – Logistic 
planning for operations
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)60
4.4. This Chapter focuses on the logistic engagement in crisis response planning.  
Fundamental to that logistic planning is ensuring robust and effective deployed 
logistic information systems to enable visibility and provide logistic situational 
awareness.  Figure 4.1 shows a summary of the crisis response planning process.
Strategic
level
Operational
level
Ta c tic a l
level Tactical missions and tasks
Cabinet
DCMO
MOD
PJHQ
OGD
Single
Services
Joint 
Forces 
Command
DSF
CDM
Allies 
IO
NGO
Political strategic analysis CDS to
SofS to
Cabinet
Crisis
JTFHQ 
(or other HQ) Collaborative planning
Operational estimate
JTFC’s direction
Military
strategicestimate
CDS’ 
Planning
Directive
COG
OLRT SAG
DCMO
brief
Political/
military
estimate
Military
strategic
estimate
summary
CDS’ 
Directive
Jt Comd’s Directive
SPG
CPT OT
CCT
J1        J2        J3        J4        J5        J6        J7        J8        J9
Legend
CCT
CDM
CDS
COGCPT
DCMO
DSF
HQ
IO
JTFC
JTFHQ
MOD
NGO
NSC
OGD
OLRT
OT
PJHQ
SAG
SofS
SPG
STRIDE
UK
Current Commitments T eam
Chief of Defence Materiel
Chief of the Defence Staff
Current Operations Group
Contingency Planning T eam
Defence Crisis Management 
Organisation
Director Special Forces
Headquarters
International Organisation(s)
Joint T ask Force Commander
Joint T ask Force Headquarters
Ministry of Defence
Non-Governmental Or ganisation(s)
National Security Council
Other Government Department(s)
Operational Liaison and 
Reconnaissance T eam
Operations T eam
Permanent Joint Headquarters
Situational Awareness Group
Secretary of State
Strategic Planning Group
Strategic Regional Implementation 
group for Defence Engagement
United Kingdom
              NSC             Cabinet Office/sub-committeeSTRIDE
Out of theatre
Theatre
Figure 4.1 – Crisis response planning process
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 61
Section 2 – Logistic input to the planning process
Strategic planning
4.5. Chief of the Defence Staff’s Planning Directive.  The Strategic Planning Group, 
in MO
D head office, prepares Chief of the Defence Staff’s (CDS’) Planning Directive.  
Logistic input to the process is led by Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic 
Operations) staff (ACDS (Log Ops)) and is based on the strategic planning group’s 
assessment of the likely duration and expected intensity of the operation.  To support 
the Directive, ACDS (Log Ops) staff conduct a strategic logistic estimate, which 
includes:
• limitations on, and requirements for, critical assets;
• any in-theatre training requirement;
• concurrency with other operations;
• movement constraints; and
• guidance on using existing arrangements such as memoranda of 
understanding and status of forces agreements.  
Logistic input to CDS’ Planning Directive for short notice operations and non-
enduring operations will usually be included in the main body of the document.  The 
Directive for more complex or enduring operations will feature a logistic summary 
paragraph in the main body and a more detailed annex (Annex 4A shows an example) 
that includes: 
• strategic and tactical movement;
• logistic governance;
• sustainability; and
• mounting and movement.
That information is usually immature, and therefore heavily caveatted, but enables 
planning progress.
4.6. Chief of the Defence Staff’s Directive.  On receiving CDS’ Planning Directive, the 
P
ermanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) Contingency Planning Team, liaising with the 
Strategic Planning Group and the Current Commitments Team,94 conducts a military 
94  A current commitments team is formed from staff drawn from across MOD and almost always 
includes regional, capability, intelligence, logistics, movements and medical staff.  A current commitments 
team handles current operational issues and issues surrounding the deployment, action and recovery of 
forces and in doing so liaises with other government departments, whose liaison officers may be included 
in a current commitment team.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)62
strategic estimate.  The Contingency Planning and Current Commitments Teams 
each include logistic representatives.  The military-strategic estimate supports the 
Government’s decision-making on whether or not to commit military forces.  If forces 
are to be committed, more detailed direction is issued through CDS’ Directive,95 
drafted by the Current Commitments Team.
4.7. Sustainability statement.  The sustainability statement (SUSTAT) confirms the 
o
verall logistic resources required and provides the authority to release and commit 
finance and materiel.
a. CDS’ Directive includes the outline Defence Support Chain plan, based on 
factors identified during the conduct of the military strategic estimate.  The 
Defence Support Chain plan is developed in later iterations of CDS’ Directive to 
include the SUSTAT.  The anticipated demand is predicted by analysis supporting 
the political-military estimate and military-strategic estimate processes.  The 
more accurate that analysis is during the early planning stages, the more robust 
the operational sustainability baseline.
b. The SUSTAT is developed by PJHQ, with contributions from subordinate joint 
and component headquarters.96  PJHQ remains the ultimate authority for any 
amendments and revisions, which should also be proposed by single-Service 
commands through PJHQ J4.
c. Each subordinate directive will also contain a SUSTAT.  They are progressively 
more detailed, to meet the specific requirements of each level of command.
d. SUSTATs are normally modified as an operation or campaign progresses and 
some may be developed for individual operations or phases within a campaign.
Annex 4B shows a generic SUSTAT.
Operational planning
4.8. Joint Commander’s Mission Directive.  Within CDS’ Directive, a joint 
c
ommander will be nominated; this is usually the Chief of Joint Operations (CJO).  
The Joint Commander (with authority from CDS’ Directive) will complete their own 
headquarters estimate (which will include logistic input from the J4 area), and then 
issue the Joint Commander’s Mission Directive.  This Directive empowers the Joint 
Force Commander and directs the enabling functions of deploy, sustain and recover.  
Alongside other key issues, the Directive details logistic factors.
95  Also referred to as CDS’ Operational Directive, to distinguish it from the earlier Planning Directive.
96  Alternatively, it is developed by Navy Command, for the Response Force Task Group.
”
“
The 
sustainability 
statement 
confirms the 
overall logistic 
resources 
required and 
provides the 
authority to 
release and 
commit finance 
and materiel.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 63
4.9. Logistic Planning Team.  All PJHQ staff branches are represented on the 
C
ontingency Planning Team.  The J4 member(s) of the team provide a logistic 
estimate prepared by a logistic planning team.97  The PJHQ Deputy Assistant Chief of 
Staff J4 most appropriate to the context of the crisis chairs the Logistic Planning Team 
(on behalf of CJO, as the Joint Commander).  Representatives from the following areas 
also contribute to the team:
• ACDS(Log Ops); 98
• Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM);
• PJHQ J1;
• Joint Force Headquarters;
• Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters;
• the single-Service commands; and
• those other government departments who are involved.
Figure 4.2 (overleaf) shows the composition, role and outputs of the Logistic Planning 
Team.  Within the team, ACDS (Log Ops) is responsible for several areas.
a. Communicating (to the Strategic Planning Group) the risks in not providing 
the minimum necessary information (the minimum information set) to the 
Logistic Planning Team in time.
b. Informing CJO of the logistic aspects of CDS’ Directive.  The Directive should 
explicitly direct CJO (as the supported commander) to produce an operation-
specific Defence Support Chain plan.
c. Managing logistic assumptions duri ng the planning process and providing 
strategic input into the logistic estimate.
97  Although the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) establishes an operational-level logistic 
planning team, this is a term which can be used for a team of logistic planners at any level, by any 
headquarters.
98  Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) (ACDS (Log Ops)) also sits on the MOD 
Strategic Planning Group and so provides the coherent logistic thread throughout strategic and 
operational planning.
“
”
The CDS 
Directive 
should 
explicitly direct 
CJO (as the 
supported 
commander) 
to produce 
an operation-
specific 
Defence 
Support Chain 
plan.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)64
4.10. Defence Equipment and Support input t o the planning process.  DSCOM is 
resp
onsible for pan-Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S) planning for operations 
and represents DE&S throughout the operational planning process.  DSCOM manages 
DE&S inputs to the planning process by establishing an operational planning group, 
chaired by Head DSCOM and attended by representatives from all relevant areas of 
DE&S. 
4.11. Operational analysis input to the planning process.  Operational analysis advice 
can s
upport the planning process (in particular the operational-level planning process 
and operational estimate) to:
J4
Ops
ACDS Log 
Ops DSCOM sSCs
N4/G4/A4
OSCC
Rep
J4
JMC
J4
Mov
J4
Med
J4
Infra
J4
HNS
J1
Ops
J4
CSO
J4
Chair
Legend
ACDS         Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff 
(Log Ops) (Logistic Operations)
CJO      Chief of Joint Operations
CPT Contingency Planning Team
CSO Contractor support to operations
DACOS Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff
DJW Director Joint Warfare
DSC Defence Support Chain
DSCOM Defence Support Chain Operations
                    and Movements
HNS Host-nation support
HQ     Headquarters
Infra Infrastructure
JFHQ  Joint Force Headquarters
JFLogC  Joint Force Logistic Component
JMC        Joint Mounting Cell
LPT Logistic Planning Team
Med       Medical
Mov       Movements
Ops        Operations
OSCC       Operational Support Capability Contract
PJHQ      Permanent Joint Headquarters
sSCs       Single-Service commands
VTC        Video teleconference
                 PJHQ representatives
                Representatives from other organisations
                CJO OPCOM when deployed, DJW in UK
Purpose: The PJHQ J1/J4 Logistic Planning Team is formed at the outset of planning 
and meets as necessary either physically, through VTC or virtually. 
It acts as the vehicle for coordinating all logistic planning activity for contingencies 
or operations, depending on the scale of the operation. 
DACOS J4 chairs the LPT. 
The LPT becomes the Logistic Operations Team if the operation goes ahead.
tAssumptions table
tRisk table
tRefined minimum 
information set
tAdvice to CPT
t-PHJTUJDFTUJNBUF
t%4$1MBO
Joint 
Commander’s 
Directive
Outputs
PJHQ
CPT
JFHQ JFLogC HQ
Figure 4.2 – Composition, role and outputs of the Logistic Planning Team
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 65
• bound and scope the problem;
• provide baseline data and assumptions; and
• discount some courses of action to allow staff effort to focus on more likely 
plans.  
As planning matures, more refined modelling provides decision support to the 
Logistic Planning Team.  The analysis, and its quantitative data, allows courses of 
action to be modelled.  Through that, the levels of logistic support that may be 
needed, or are available, can be assessed.  This also enables the risks of those courses 
of action to be better understood.  The analysis can help in generating, populating 
and configuring the joint force element table and joint desired order of arrival.  
Operational analysis resources are based within PJHQ and other organisations, such as 
the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl) and ACDS (Log Ops).
4.12. Logistic operational analysis tools.  Several software packages are available to 
s
upport logistic operational analysis.  An example is the Coupling Bridge Analysis Tool 
(COBRAT), developed by the ACDS (Log Ops) Operational Analysis Team.  This tool 
enables users to map available resources against supply, movement and handling 
requirements for a joint force element table.  More widely, NATO’s Logistic Functional 
Area Services99 includes a range of operational analysis tools that can contribute to 
deployment and sustainment planning and logistic reporting.
4.13. Defence Support Chain plan.  The Defence Support Chain forms the ‘spine’ 
of lo
gistic support to operations.  The main output of the logistic estimate is an 
operation-specific Defence Support Chain plan.  This plan requires input from J1 
(personnel) and J4 (operations, movements, medical, infrastructure, contracts, host-
nation support and logistic information systems).  In the early stages of planning, 
the Logistic Planning Team may not have fully agreed with PJHQ J3 the information 
required to produce the best Defence Support Chain plan for the joint force element 
table or the joint desired order of arrival.  Initial estimates can, however, be refined 
and agreed during the iterative stages of the planning process.  Even though 
some information may remain unconfirmed, it should not prevent initial planning.  
The Defence Support Chain plan should be underpinned by a set of supporting 
annexes.100
a. Minimum information set.  To carry out the quantitative analysis needed 
for D
efence Support Chain planning, a minimum information set is required 
at the earliest opportunity before starting a logistic estimate.  The minimum 
99  Logistic Functional Area Services (LOGFAS) is due to be replaced by Logistic Functional Services 
(LOGFS) at a date yet to be determined.
100  Amongst its annexes, the Defence Support Chain plan includes: the sustainability statement; the 
Coupling Bridge, logistic information system, medical, personnel and reverse supply chain directives; and 
the Joint Mounting and Movements Order.
“
”
The Defence 
Support Chain 
forms the 
‘spine’ of 
logistic support 
to operations.  
The main 
output of the 
logistic estimate 
is an operation-
specific 
Defence 
Support Chain 
plan. 
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)66
information set should be provided by the Strategic Planning Group, refined 
by the Logistic Planning Team, drawing on CDS’ Directive or based on MOD-
endorsed planning assumptions.  The minimum information set is an iterative 
document and should be continually refined and informed by the Logistic 
Planning Team.  The minimum information set consists of four key elements:
• destination;
• intensity;
• scale; and 
• timing.   
The reliability and accuracy of these elements will improve over time.  They 
are used to address the key questions during the early stages of the planning 
process and subsequently for campaign transition and redeployment.  
Figure 4.3 provides an example of the content of a minimum information set.
b. Synchronisation matrix.  The synchronisation matrix is a detailed Defence 
S
upport Chain timeline that shows critical milestones and dependencies.  The 
synchronisation matrix is linked to the Commander’s intent through the joint 
action synchronisation matrix.101
c. Assumptions table.  J3/J5 planners will not always be able to provide 
det
ailed planning parameters.  The Logistic Planning Team will produce an 
assumptions table to develop the plan.  Those assumptions need to be owned, 
documented and reviewed during each iteration of the plan.  To aid planning 
coherence, all support chain planners should use a common set of assumptions.
d. Risk table.  The Defence Support Chain must be established with the 
res
ilience to cope with operational uncertainty.  Risks102 may be defined by the 
Joint Commander or identified during the support chain planning process.  They 
must be accountably owned and have mitigating actions or contingency plans 
in place.
e. Capability gaps.  Once the Defence Support Chain configuration is 
des
igned, it is assessed for capability gaps based on information contained in 
the assumptions and risk tables.  Those capability gaps should be expressed to 
the Joint Commander as a resource bill to meet the requirement in full, along 
with the shortfall in operational capability that would result from failing to 
address the gap.
101  AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-level Planning  (with UK national elements).
102  For further information, see Joint Service Publication (JSP) 892, Risk Management.
”
“
J3/J5 planners 
will not always 
be able to 
provide detailed 
planning 
parameters.  
The Logistic 
Planning Team 
will produce 
an assumptions 
table to develop 
the plan.  
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 67
Information required Information needed to:
Destination • What are the likely locations?
• 
What restrictions are there on 
strategic lines of communication 
(LOC), air ports of disembarkation 
(APOD) and sea ports of 
disembarkation (SPOD), including 
access, basing and over-flight 
limitations?
• Identify the Logistic Information 
System requirement.
• Assess what LOCs and transport will 
be required.
• Anticipate the level of in-theatre 
resource availability.
• Identify the best options for 
strategic LOCs, APODs and SPODs.
• Assess the requirement on in-
theatre LOCs and nodes.
Intensity • What is the combat activity profile? • Identify the rate at which the force 
w
ill consume commodities.
Scale • What force elements will be 
deplo
yed?
• What is the force laydown?
• Identify the number of consuming 
elements we need to sustain.
• Calculate the lift capacity required 
to transport the force to its 
destinations.
• Identify how many elements will 
consume at active combat rate.
Timing • What is the deployment timescale?
• 
In what priority do personnel, force 
elements and equipment need to 
arrive in theatre?
• What is the duration of the 
operation?
• Assess the required capacity and 
type of deployment transportation.
• Identify when deployment should 
begin.
• Assess the required sustainability of 
the Defence Support Chain.
• Anticipate recovery requirements.
Figure 4.3 – Example of minimum information set
Enduring operations
4.14. Relief-in-place.  In enduring operations, units that have completed their 
op
erational tour must be replaced.  This process may also involve the roulement of 
unit equipment, providing the opportunity to conduct deep maintenance and repair.  
a. Relief-in-place is conducted in a controlled manner and, for 
long-standing operations, against a predicted schedule.  This schedule, set 
against the force profile, is articulated through a statement of movements 
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)68
requirement.  The statement acts as the planning guidance for the 
relief-in-place periods and for the periods in-between; it influences the Coupling 
Bridge construct.  The planning process is largely the same as previously 
described, although reliefs-in-place need scheduled tailored movements 
packages.
b. The joint force element table is p lanned and controlled by PJHQ-J4 Joint 
Mounting cell, with input from theatre and single-Service commands.  The 
cell refines the statement of movements requirement and sets out the precise 
movement requirement over the relief-in-place period.  This enables DSCOM to 
resource and coordinate strategic movement assets.
c. Relief-in-place may result in a distinctive cycle in the profile of demand 
for sustainment.  Demand will fall in the weeks immediately before a unit is 
replaced and remain at a lower level until the replacement unit is established in 
the joint operations area.  DSCOM adjusts the movements schedule accordingly, 
in-line with PJHQ direction.
Logistic planning in the joint force
4.15. Logistic input to the main estimate must support the overall J5 plan.  Planning 
headquarters are likely to form their own logistic planning team to conduct a logistic 
estimate and examine the logistic issues of the J5 plan in greater detail.103  All J4 
information (including risks, limits and options) should be passed to the J4-lead to 
ensure that the main operational estimate process reflects the logistic issues.  Also, all 
J4 planning should be conducted in-line with, and feed into, the operational estimate.  
Although the operational-level planning process and operational estimate follow 
sequential processes, the changing nature of the planning environment makes them 
iterative and logistic staff should ensure that they are aware of, influence and respond 
to each version of the overall plan as it develops.  Annex 4C is an outline guide for 
logistic input to the operational estimate while Annex 4D provides a non-exhaustive 
aide memoire of logistic factors that could be considered within the logistic estimate.
4.16. The logistic estimate, and Defence Support Chain development, must include 
plans for delivering logistic information.  High quality logistic information enables 
logistics to be more efficient and agile enough to support the deployment.  
103  Commonly referred to as a deep dive.
Section 3 – Logistic information planning
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 69
4.17. The logistic information planning process needs to address the supporting 
infrastructure, information exchange requirements and communications 
requirements.  Logistic information planning should be integrated with the logistic 
planning process and the wider overall communications and information systems 
planning process.  Logistic information planners should engage early with PJHQ J6 
and DE&S Support Chain Information Services, so they can concurrently identify any 
constraints, limitations or opportunities.  The logistic information system requirement 
must be clearly articulated in CDS’ Directive and the Defence Support Chain plan.  The 
importance of data produced in logistic applications (including materiel accounting, 
consignment tracking and medical information services) is widely understood, as is its 
utility for audit purposes (for example, by the National Audit Office or Her Majesty’s 
Revenue and Customs).  Figure 4.4 shows the logistic information planning process.
Legend
CPT     Contingency Planning Team
DSCOM Defence Support Chain Operations
                   and Movements
IER     Information exchange requirements
ISS     Information Systems and Services
Log IS  Logistic information services
LPT  Logistic Planning Team
NTM  Notice to move
PJHQ  Permanent Joint Headquarters
SCIS  Support Chain Information Services
CPT (PJHQ J5 lead) 
Direction
PJHQ J1/J4 
Endorsement and 
consolidation
Required Log IS 
laydown and 
equipment requirement
Log IS IER
(as part of 
consolidated J1/J4 IER)
ISS
Other 
Branch IERs
PJHQ J6
SCIS
Log IS 
consideration of 
factors
DSCOM lead
LPT 
(PJHQ J4 lead)
Logistic estimate
Medical input
Personnel input
Infrastructure input
J4 Draft 
Log IS instruction
Figure 4.4 – Logistic information planning process
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)70
4.18. Logistic information factors.  ACDS (Log Ops), as Joint User, is supported by 
all headquar
ters and organisations involved in the Defence Support Chain process 
in considering logistic information factors.  This ensures the totality of the logistic 
information system requirement in the strategic base, across the Coupling Bridge and 
in the joint operations area is addressed.  
1.19. 
Key points 
• Logistic principles emphasise how critically  important it is to incorporate logistic 
planning, across the Whole Force and including contractor support, as an integral 
part of planning for operations.
• UK strategic and operational planning uses the NATO operations planning process, 
operational-level planning process and operational estimate, in accordance with 
JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine, Allied Command Operations’ Comprehensive 
Operations Planning Directive and AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-level 
Planning (with UK national elements).
• Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) staff (ACDS (Log Ops)) 
leads the logistic input to the MOD’s Strategic Planning Group and Chief of the 
Defence Staff’s Planning Directive.
• MOD and PJHQ work closely together to develop the military strategic estimate 
which informs the Secretary of State on the implications of the UK’s response 
options and also shapes CDS’ Operations Directive.  ACDS (Log Ops) staff provide 
the logistic link between this work and the Strategic Planning Group.
• Through the Defence Support Chain plan, CDS’ Operations Directive will include 
a sustainability statement.  This statement confirms the overall logistic resource 
requirement and provides authority to release and commit finance to an operation.  
Increasingly detailed sustainability statements are developed at each subordinate 
level of command. 
• The logistic estimate, conducted by a PJHQ logistic planning team, provides input 
to both the military strategic estimate and the operational estimate.  A logistic 
planning team is formed around PJHQ J4 and includes representation from: ACDS 
(Log Ops); Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM); PJHQ J1; 
Joint Force Headquarters; Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters; 
single-Service commands; and those other government departments who are 
involved.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 71
Key points (continued)
• Logistic planning teams in subordinate headquarters are similarly integrated in the 
operational-level planning process.
• DSCOM is responsible for pan-Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S) planning for 
operations and represents DE&S throughout the operational planning process.
• Developing the Defence Support Chain plan is a key element of the logistic 
estimate.  The Defence Support Chain plan is underpinned by supporting annexes.
• Minimum information set.
• Synchronisation matrix.
• Assumptions table.
• Risk table.
• Capability gaps.
• Within the joint force, logistic input to the main estimate must continue to 
support the overall J5 plan.  Although the operational-level planning process 
and operational estimate follow sequential processes, the changing nature of the 
planning environment makes them naturally iterative and logistic staff should 
ensure that they are aware of, influence and respond to each version of the overall 
plan, as it develops.
• Logistic information planning is a vital element of the overall logistic planning 
process.  It enables logistics to be more efficient and agile enough to support the 
operation.
• Logistic information system planning should be integrated with the overall 
communications and information systems planning process.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)72
Annex ? to CDS’ Dir **/** to JT Comd Op ****  dated ** *** ** Op 
**** - Logistics Directive
Context
1. The annex gives direction to the Joint Commander for the deployment, 
sustainment and recovery of Op XXXXXXX; the UK’s military commitment to 
xxxxxxxxxxxx
2. The paragraph should then set the context against which the Operation is executed
Division of responsibilities
3. The logistic division of responsibilities is as follows:
ACDS (Log Ops) Joint Commander SCs DE&S
Defi ne and maintain 
the strategic logistic 
support policy
Activate and 
maintain the 
strategic LOCs
Contribute to and 
execute plans as 
required by the Jt Comd
Allocate assets 
to enable the 
strategic LOCs
And further 
responsibilities as 
defi ned...
Logistic concept of operations
4. Logistic intent.  To establish efficient and robust logistic support to Op XXXXX  
5.
 Logistic scheme of manoeuvre.  Details of the overall logistic responsibilities of the 
Join
t Commander and any considerations that must take into account when designing the 
logistic laydown.
6. Logistic end-state.  A description of the desired logistic end-state.
Annex 4A – Generic 
logistic annex to 
CDS’ Directive
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 73
7. Logistic Main Effort.  Description of the Main Effort and details of SUPPORTED and 
S
UPPORTING commands and organisations.
Governance and risk
8. Risk.  Considerations of logistic risk and details of the risk reporting mechanisms and 
pr
ocedures.
9. Governance.  Direction to the Joint Commander to ensure appropriate logistic 
go
vernance measures are implemented and that a joint inspection regime is put in place 
from the outset.
Logistic information systems 
10. NATO logistic information systems.  Direction to the Joint Commander to ensure 
t
hat national procedures for deployment, sustainment and recovery are coherent with 
NATO (if appropriate) and integrated with NATO logistic information systems.
11.  National logistic information systems.  Direction to the Joint Commander to 
mandat
e that national logistic information systems are used for all materiel accounting, 
equipment support, asset management and asset tracking, to comply with HRMC import 
export regulations and to maintain POGO.
Sustainability Statement 
12. Direction to the Joint Commander to ensure that end-to-end planning and 
forecasting is conducted to effectively match demand and supply and consequently define 
the optimum level of in-theatre resources required to support the deployed force.  Details 
of publication of the Sustainability Statement (SUSTAT).
Equipment
13. Equipment Table.  Direction to the Joint Commander to ensure that the theatre 
E
quipment Table is maintained in accordance with the Service Commands’ guidance and 
procedures.
14. Equipment Support.  Direction to the Joint Commander to define the required 
a
vailability of specific platforms, equipment and systems in the Op XXXXX SUST AT, which 
in turn will drive the development of the theatre equipment support plan.  
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)74
Materiel 
Details for each class of supply to support the deployed force
15. Class 1 (Uniform Rate Consumables).  
16. Class 2 (ES and GS materiel).   
17. Class 3 (Fuels, lubricants and associated products).
18. Class 4 (Engineer materiel).
19. Class 5 (Ammunition).
Joint Support Chain
20. Performance management.  Direction for the Joint Commander to ensure both 
for
ward and reverse flows are effective and efficient.
21. Lines of communication.  D etails of the lines of communication (LOC) that will be 
necessary for the sustainment of the operation.
22. Multinational sharing.  Direction for the Joint Commander to ensure that any 
e
xisting multinational arrangements are fully exploited and, ensure that any spare UK 
sustainment capacity is offered to any other troop contributing nations.
Whole Force approach
23.  Details of what the Whole Force for Op XXXXX consists of and direction for the Joint 
C
ommander to determine the appropriate mix, acknowledging that that this mix will 
change as the operation develops over time.
Logistic success criteria
24. From a logistic perspective, Op XXXX will be considered a success if the 
following criteria have been met:
a. Example:  The balance between support in-theatre and support from the 
strategic base is achieved such that the air bridge is able to support operational 
activity effectively and efficiently.
b. Example:  Logistic support is costed and accounted for correctly.
4A
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 75
General
4B.1. Introduction.  State here the purpose of the sustainability statement (SUSTAT) 
and the op
eration for which it is written.  Reference the key planning documents to 
provide a baseline for the document.  These references should include:
• Chief of the Defence Staff’s (CDS’) Planning Directive;
• CDS’ Directive;
• theatre reconnaissance reports;
• preliminary operations reconnaissance reports and/or Assessment Reports 
(ASSESSREPS);
• Defence Logistic Direction;
• component logistic sustainability planning assumptions; and
• Service-specific planning directives (if appropriate).
4B.2. Background and governance.  The SUSTAT is developed by the Permanent 
J
oint Headquarters (PJHQ).1  PJHQ remains the ultimate authority for any amendments 
and revisions, although these can and should be proposed by single-Service 
commands, and subordinate joint and component headquarters, through PJHQ J4.
Situation
4B.3. Key assumptions.  Key assumptions should be derived from the key planning 
do
cuments or have provenance as factors from initial estimates.  They set the criteria 
against which the rest of the SUSTAT is developed.  As the SUSTAT develops through 
its iterations, any further planning assumptions from the Operations Directorate 
should be incorporated and shown in bold to highlight the change.  Examples of 
further planning assumptions are:
• size of the area of operations;
• size/type of the deployment (for example, complex, simple and enduring 
stabilisation interventions);
• assumptions on multinational support and interoperability, and any 
support to or from other government departments; 
• assumptions on host-nation support; and
• level of component command.
1  Alternatively, it is developed by Navy Command for the Response Force Task Group (RFTG).
Annex 4B – Generic 
sustainability statement
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)76
4B.4. Force composition.
a. Units.  Unit information should be shown pictorially as an order of battle 
(
ORBAT) at Annex 5A to the SUSTAT and tabulated below to develop additional 
detail.  Locations refer to in-theatre locations, not the strategic base.
b. Key equipments.  Key equipment information quantifies the percentage 
a
vailability of key equipments to be achieved at full operating capability and 
then be sustained.  The information should be tabulated using the format and 
footnotes below.  The figures must be compiled in consultation with Joint 
Forces Command and single-Service commands, who will consult subject 
matter experts and advise on feasibility in light of platform numbers:
2 Shown as a percentage figure except for helicopters which are shown as task lines from total aircraft 
fleet.
3 To be in kilometres/day for land assets, nautical miles/day for maritime assets and sorties for air assets.  
All helicopters, irrespective of Service, are shown as hours per task line or hours per aircraft depending on 
sustainability implications.
Ser Location Maritime Land Air Other
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f )
1
Location 1 Insert force 
elements (FE), 
starting with 
Headquarters 
(HQ) groups
Insert FE, starting 
with HQ groups
Insert FE starting 
with HQ groups
Ports of 
disembarkation
2 Location 2 As above As above As above Forward 
Mounting Base
3 Location 3 As above As above As above Other 
government 
departments 
(OGD)
4 Location 4 As above As above As above Contractor 
support to 
operations (CSO)
Ser Equipment Availability 2 Steady state 
(SS) activity3
Other combat 
(OC) activity
High intensity 
combat activity
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f )
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 77
c. Personnel totals.
Ser Location Maritime Land Air OGD CSO Force totals
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h)
1
Location 1 Insert No. Insert No. Insert No. Insert No. Insert No.
2 Location 2 Insert No. Insert No. Insert No. Insert No. Insert No.
4B.5. Supported component.  The supported component for the operation should 
b
e formally stated here in bold capitals, for example MARITIME.  The supported 
component may be different for different phases of the operation.
4B.6. Campaign chronology.
a. Deployment period.  Components will deploy to meet the following 
tim
elines.
Ser Capability Maritime Land Air OGD CSO
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f ) (g)
1
Preliminary Operations --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/--
2 Initial Operating Capability --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/--
3 Full Operating Capability --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/-- --/--/--
b. Deliberate operations.  Must include the foll owing information.
(1) Operational profile.  This must state whether Peace Enforcement (PE)/
P
eacekeeping (PK)/Deliberate Intervention (DI) etc and then quantify the 
surge sustainment capability required.  For example, ‘the operational 
profile is for PE ops requiring Steady State (SS) sustainment but retaining 
the capability in theatre to surge to High Intensity Combat (HIC)’.
(2) Provisional activity rates.  These should be tabulated below:
Component Activity in days In theatre training (ITT) 4 SS OC HIC Total days
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f ) (g)
M
aritime
Land
Air
4 This figure must factor in environmental training.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)78
(3) Concept of operations.  An outline of the provisional concept of 
op
erations must be stated in terms of:
• the support required;
• to what level of deployed force;
• over what in-theatre lines of communication (LOC); and
• over what duration.  
Although this does not preclude delivering support outside these parameters, 
it provides a useful baseline for operational and tactical planning.  It should be 
tabulated using the fields below.
Activity Activity in days OC HIC Total Remarks
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f )
c.
 Other operations.
4B.7. Theatre stockholding policy.  The theatre stockholding policy should be shown 
as either a t
able, or preferably a schematic, in the annex to the SUSTAT.  It must be 
coherent with the information on force composition at paragraph 4B.4 and must 
reflect the metrics relevant to each component, for example:
• endurance days for maritime;
• daily consumption rate (DCR) for land; and
• days of supply (DOS) for air.  
It must include the support chain processing time (SCPT) and state whether or not 
the UK is complying with a NATO stockholding policy.  It should be coherent with the 
policy on priming equipment packs and deployable spares packs.  It should stipulate, 
by level (including maximum levels), what will be held where and tabulated as shown 
below:
DOS/DCR 
holding
Level ITT SS OC HIC Remarks
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f ) (g)
Fo
rce
Formation
Unit
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 79
4B.8. Support chain processing time.  In calculating theatre holdings, the formula 
h = x + y should b
e used where: h is the theatre holding to be achieved, expressed in 
DOS, x is the SUSTAT-mandated holding (in DOS) and y is the support chain processing 
time for shipping a standard priority code (SPC) 03 demand.  If required, the strategic 
airbridge must be used to mitigate sustainment risk.  Care should be taken with 
respect to contractor logistic support (CLS), where contracting for capability and 
contracting for availability contracts have minimum pipeline times built into them.  
The minimum total time for planning purposes from placing to satisfying demands 
should be tabulated in accordance with Joint Service Publication 886.5 
Deploy/sustain/recover
4B.9. Frequency of re-supply.  The frequency of re-supply will affect the sustainability 
of all c
omponents; therefore, the ‘pull’ of items and personnel into the joint operations 
area must be prioritised.  Improved availability of re-supply options, by air or surface, 
will reduce the need to prioritise.  Limitations on re-supply will generate a greater need 
to prioritise and for increased component/Joint Force Logistic Component interaction 
to meet the Joint Task Force Commander’s operational plan.
4B.10. Support chain processing time.  An understanding of SCPT is essential to allow 
the c
orrect priority to be given for any item moving through the Defence Support 
Chain.  Failure to correctly apply SCPT may cause items to be over-prioritised and 
reduce the efficiency of the support chain with unnecessary movements.
4B.1 1. Operational mounting process.  The operational mounting process and 
ac
curate details of the Coupling Bridge are essential for effective movement from the 
strategic base to the joint operations area.  The diverse requirements of components 
must be reflected together with clear parameters for the allocation of movement 
priorities.
Destination
4B.12. This paragraph should cover the charac teristics of the operational theatre.  It 
should also cover any intra-theatre or intra-joint operations area LOCs but not the 
strategic LOC.  It must describe the environment, the threat, port of disembarkation 
characteristics and transport infrastructure and deliver an assessment of host-nation 
support capability.  This should be tabulated as shown below or articulated under 
separate sub-headings.
5  Joint Service Publication (JSP) 886, Defence Logistics Support Chain Manual , Volume 3, Part 1. 
Additionally, contractor logistic support (CLS) and contracting for availability contractual obligations to 
return key components/assemblies for repair need to be considered to avoid additional contract costs or 
non-availability of key/critical spares.  JSP 886 is to be subsumed by the Defence Logistic Framework during 
2015.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)80
Ser Factor Characteristics Remarks
(a) (b) (c) (d)
1
Environment
2 Threat
3 Transport
4 Host-nation support
5 APOD/SPOD
Distance
4B.13. Distance should be stipulated using nautical miles (nm), hours (hrs) and days 
as the metric for maritime and air and kilometres (km), hrs and days for land.  Where 
known, details on the ‘going’ for land (metal, paved or unpaved road) should be 
included.
Ser LOC Geographical boundaries Characteristics
(a) (b) (c) (d)
1
Strategic sea
2 Strategic land (eg, rail)
3 Strategic air
4 Operational sea
5 Operational land
6 Operational air
7 Tactical sea
8 Tactical land
9 Tactical air
Duration
4B.14. Duration must be coherent with the campaign chronology articulated at 
paragraph 4B.6.  Additional information should focus on any phasing that requires 
the use of staged or temporary locations and/or capabilities.  Examples may include 
deploying an air or aviation force into the joint operations area or using a forward 
mounting base for deployment and recovery.  The use of key equipments could 
also be phased with more assets required for deployment and recovery than for 
sustainment.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 81
Demand
4B.15. Class 1.6 
a. Water.  The quantities for this commodity are contained in planning 
ass
umptions.  Military judgement should be applied when using them.
Ser Purpose Volume SS 
activity
Volume OC 
activity
Volume HIC 
activity Remarks
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f )
1
Field consumption
2 In-camp steady state
3 Medical
4 Bottled water
5 Vehicle maintenance
6 Aircraft maintenance7
7 CBRN decontamination
8 In-theatre washdown
b. Rations.
Ser Type Requirement
(a) (b) (c)
1
Fresh
2 Operational Ration Packs (ORP)
4B.16. Class 2 – Materiel-scaled.  Joint Forces Command and single-Service 
c
ommands, in conjunction with DE&S project teams, are to direct unit holdings 
of scaled materiel and consumables consistent with the campaign chronology at 
paragraph 4B.6 and based on:
• historical and predictive equipment failure data; 8
• SCPT guidance in the SUSTAT;
• support urgent operational requirement equipment;
• environment-specific personal equipment issues; and
• environment-specific equipment packs.
6  Maritime figures can be found in Maritime Logistic Support Planning Assumptions .
7 Should include any requirement for ionised water.
8  Including for equipment supported through CLS, where scaled.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)82
4B.17. Class 2 – Materiel-general.  This should stipulate the in-theatre stockholdings 
for all C
lass 2 materiel.
4B.18. Class 3 – Fuel and lubricants.  This paragraph should direct the Strategic Fuels 
A
uthority (SFA) to hold a shelf stock, where possible, of the required items from the 
Joint Forces Command and single-Service commands.  This will minimise the risk of nil 
stock and delay to the SCPT.  Increasing use of CLS will see some elements of fuel and 
lubricants being provided by a contractor rather than the SFA.  It should also:
• stipulate the in-theatre stock holding for general and specialist 
commodities; and
• tabulate the bulk fuel types, by quantity and location, that are to be held 
as sustainment stock in-theatre.
4B.19. Class 4 – Engineer and general Defence stores.  This paragraph should mirror 
the forma
t above and as a minimum include:
Ser Type Requirement
(a) (b) (c)
1
Expeditionary Camp Infrastructure (ECI)
2 Defence stores
3 Engineer resources
4B.20. Class 5 – Ammunition.  The likelihood of variations to the SCPT due to 
sp
ecialist natures, additional release authority, requirement for controlled humidity 
environment storage or customs and specialist transport requirements should be 
assessed.
a. Theatre stockholdings should be articulated using specific Joint Forces 
Command and single-Service commands nomenclature (for example, 
standard weapon loads), geographic location and planned intensity of 
operation.
Ser Type Location Requirement
(a) (b) (c) (d)
1
Maritime component 1
22
3 Land component 1
42
5 Air component 1
62
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 83
b. Any stock held by DE&S to reduce the deployed footprint, and mitigate 
the cost of controlled humidity environment storage in-theatre, should be 
held at a stipulated readiness to move which must be articulated here.9 
4B.21. Medical.  The medical laydown must comply with the force composition table 
a
t paragraph 4B.4.  J1 staff may draw upon operational analysis to estimate potential 
fatalities for repatriation planning.  The planned laydown of Role 1/2/3 in theatre must 
be specified.  A casualty estimate should be tabulated as shown below:
Ser Type Requirement
(a) (b) (c)
1
Wounded in action (WIA) peak % range, of which ?% will require
2 Disease and non-battle injuries % of which ?% will require
3 Medical evacuation As required
4 Strategic air evacuation % per month
4B.22. Chemical, biological, radiolo gical and nuclear.  Any detailed chemical, 
biolo
gical, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) scalings should be relegated to an annex.  
Given the cost and limited life of CBRN-specific antibiotics, these CBRN stocks should 
only be deployed where the J2 assessment supports the decision.
4B.23. Mission essential equipment.  Details of any mission essential equipment 
re
quired for the operation should be provided along with the priorities that must be 
applied to ensure its availability.  This will inform the relative priorities for moving, 
maintaining, repairing and fitting mission essential equipment.
4B.24. Servicing and repair policy.  Effective servicing and repair is essential for 
main
taining the availability of equipment and force elements. This support may be 
provided by individual components, host-nation support or contractors.  Clear policy 
guidance must be given to ensure awareness of the available solutions for dealing 
with unserviceable equipment at theatre level.
Distribution:
Fleet Commander
Commander Land Forces
Deputy Commander Operations Air Command
Commander Joint Task Force
9  Planners should consider units being supported from the sea.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)84
Maritime Component Commander
Land Component Commander
Air Component Commander
Commander Joint Force Logistic Operations
Commander British Forces
Commander Preliminary Operations (if nominated)
Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations) 
Service Commands - Logistic branches
Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements
Multinational Liaison Officers (as appropriate)
Headquarters Director Special Forces
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 85
Annex 4C – Aide memoire 
for logistic input to the 
operational estimate
4C.1. Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-level 
Planning provides doctrinal guidance, in eight steps, for the operational-level 
planning process.1  NATO Allied Command Operations’ Comprehensive Operations 
Planning Directive (COPD) describes, in six phases, the activities to be carried out 
when planning at the operational level.2  COPD Phase 3 is the operational estimate 
which broadly covers the same section of the operational-level planning process as 
AJP-5 steps 2 to 6.  This aide memoire offers guidance to J1/J4 staff on how to provide 
logistic input to the operational estimate, using COPD Phase 3 as a frame.
Framing the operational-level problem
4C.2. This activity is J2-led and the J4 input should focus on using the J2 feed to 
understand the destination environment.  The J4 planner should consider:
• real estate and infrastructure (for example, ports of disembarkation or
 potential basing options);
• potential main supply routes; and
• host nation, as well as coalition/partner, capabilities.
As well as the operating environment, J4 staff should be aware of the anticipated 
intensity, scale and timing of the operation, as well as concurrent operations and 
other contingency planning.
1  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-level Planning  (with UK national 
elements).
2  NATO Allied Command Operations’ Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive .
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)86
Phase 3A: Mission analysis
Analyse the mission
4C.3. As the headquarters focuses on analysing the mission, and developing 
an initial operational design, in preparation for the mission analysis brief to the 
Commander, the J1/J4 default approach should be as follows.
a. Logistic principal officer (either on own or with selected staff officers) 
under
takes a logistic mission analysis by answering four broad questions.
• What type of operation is it?  For example, is it kinetic, non-combatant 
evacuation, disaster relief or humanitarian assistance?  This provides an 
early focus on key logistic challenges and requirements.
• Where will forces be operating?  Understanding the destination and 
joint operations area size better helps staff to refine the Coupling 
Bridge requirement as well as lines of communication into, and within, 
the joint operations area.  Staff should assess what emphasis can be 
placed on host-nation support, contractor logistics and in-country 
resources.
• What forces are available?  Both in terms of forces that must be 
supported and also logistic force elements that are available to deliver 
that support.  Capabilities should be understood at this stage, so that 
they can be matched to the required logistic effects.
• How long will the operation last ?  This helps scope the sustainment 
phase of the operation but also has a direct impact on equipment 
support, roulement and redeployment functions.
b. SO1/2s concurrently carry out initial fac tor analysis, within which the 
problem is framed and capabilities are identified.  
(1) Key (broad order) output should include:
• environmental capabilities (by in terpreting the order of battle 
(ORBAT)/force element table analysis);
• destination, distance, demand and duration (the 4Ds);
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 87
• key timings which will initiate logistic planning for the joint 
desired order of arrival – based on force element readiness, 
current lines of communication, deployment timings, initial 
operating capability, full operating capability, overlaid on to any 
campaign/operational phases;
• strategic through to tactical speed/time/distance calculations; 
and
• an estimate of the overall size of force within the joint operations 
area.
(2) This leads to an initial cross-br ief amongst the J1/J4 staff, following 
which the logistic principal officer provides further direction and 
guidance.
(3) Teams then break into enviro nment groups and conduct more 
detailed factor analysis.  Key outputs, which must be formally captured 
and re
corded, are:
• 
staff tasks (further work for J1/J4);
• logistic effects required (and potential troops to task);
• risks/issues;
• constraints;
• freedoms; and
• additional resource bids/requests for forces (to provide or 
enhance missing or insufficient capabilities).  
(4) J4 staff must also consider joint enablers and may establish a 
separate work strand (to include logistic command and control).
(5) By liaising with other staff branches, J1/J4 staff ensure logistic 
assumptions and interpretations are common across the headquarters. 
(6) Routine cross-briefs should take place to ensure a common 
understanding across J1/J4 staff.  The briefing format should follow:
• bottom line up-front;
• shortfalls;
• tasks;
• risks;
• freedoms; and
• constraints.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)88
Phase 3B: Courses of action development
(7) As Phase 3A progresses, staff re port by exception until the final 
cross-brief to the logistic principal officer. 
(8) A J1/J4 staff officer should be nominated to consolidate J1/J4 three-
column formats and corral:
• staff tasks;
• tasks (and tactics and techniques);
• planning guidance;
• requests for information;
• additional resource bids/requests for forces;
• risks;
• freedoms; and
• constraints.
Develop own courses of action
4C.4. After the Commander’s direction fo llowing the mission analysis brief, 
J1/J4 provides a minimum of one logistic subject matter expert to each of the 
headquarters’ course of action (COA) development teams.
• Environmental subject matter expert s are the default (if available) unless 
an individual COA has a specific requirement (for example, medical or 
movement). 
• The logistic subject matter experts provide the logistic conscience to the 
COA development teams.   They ensure that the initial idea is, and remains, 
logistically feasible as it is developed. 
• The logistic subject matter experts also ensure that the core J1/J4 team 
is routinely briefed on how each COA is developing and what logistic 
implications are emerging.
4C.5. Concurrently, the remainder of the J1/J 4 staff form a logistic planning team to 
refine the logistic aspects which are common to all COAs.  This is the time for detailed 
logistic planning across:
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 89
• the 4Ds;
• command, control, communication,  computers and information (C4I);
• each class of supply (remembering st orage and specific requirements – for 
example, chilled);
• mounting and movements (staff can start initial desired order of arrival work 
with J5);
• infrastructure;
• tactical movements (air, aviation, ground);
• host-nation support, in-country resource and contractor logistics;
• J1;
• medical; and
• J8.
Analyse courses of action
4C.6. As COAs are further developed, J1/J4 must understand and articulate the 
logistic implications – reach, sustainability, time, additional resource requirements 
and so on should all become apparent here (considering both the art of the possible 
and the art of the practical). 
4C.7. Each COA, as it is developed, must be logistically staff-checked.  This can 
create a logistic ‘drag’ to headquarters planning and, to improve its effectiveness and 
coherence, J1/J4 staff should follow the mantra:
• requirement;
• resource; and
• risk.
4C.8. The Commander’s direction will articulate (‘big hand, small map’) the 
capability priorities and this stage should now start to refine them.  The Commander’s 
capability priorities should be captured and will, eventually, form the mission critical 
equipment list.  J1/J4 staff report on mission critical equipment in terms of equipment 
availability and that, in turn, drives any requirement for further detailed reports and 
returns.
Compare courses of action
4C.9. During evaluation, COAs should be scored against the logistic principles 3 and 
‘stressed’ against logistic frictions.  The results will contribute towards the staff’s COA 
recommendations to the Commander.
3  See Chapter 1.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)90
Refine selected course of action
4C.10. After the Commander’s course of action decision, the plan is developed in 
detail before completing the Phase by issuing the operational planning directive to 
component headquarters. 
a. The COA must be fully resourced (and sequenced), the joint desired 
order of arrival must be refined and detailed sustainability assumptions 
proven.  
b. There may be a temptation for headquarters staff branches to revert to 
stovepipes while refining the COA.  J1/J4 staff should therefore maintain a 
rigorous process of liaison with other branches and internal cross-briefing.  
Changes to the COA should be captured and staff-checked for logistic 
consequences and feasibility.  Resourcing can then be confirmed or adjusted.
Throughout Phase 3
4C.1 1. Requests for information.  Requests for information must be recorded as they 
ari
se.  J1/J4 should hold them centrally.  The requests for information are coordinated 
and monitored by a nominated J1/J4 officer, who will:
• staff them through th e branch coordinator;
• ensure that answers are distributed; and 
• hasten outstanding requests for information until they are answered or 
can be closed as no longer required.
4C.12. Risk4 is a key element of the logistic planning process.  A risk represents a 
threa
t to a desired effect, decisive condition, line of operation or the mission and 
needs to be elevated from branch to headquarters level.  If a threat does not impact 
a decisive condition, it is an issue and should be managed accordingly by the branch 
within its logistic planning.  Risk should be managed centrally in the branch by a 
nominated post (usually at SO2 level).  The branch risk manager interfaces with the 
wider headquarters risk process, using the treat, tolerate, terminate and transfer 
model.  Any residual risk needs to be articulated and understood.
4  For an explanation of risk in operational-level planning see AJP-5,  Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-
level Planning (with UK national elements).
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 91
Annex 4D – Consideration of factors 
aide memoire
Question area Deduction Responsibility
1. Destination
• Environment (temperature, 
altitude, precipitation 
and so on) - what specific environmental factors will affect demand?
• Identify seasonal differences and timelines to ensure 
adequate seasonal stocks are delivered by surface.
• Equipment. • Impact on critical spares.
• Special environmental enhancements and lead times 
for procurement/urgent operational requirements and impact on the Coupling Bridge (volume and timing).
• Maintenance capacity.
• Defence Support Chain Operations and 
Movements (DSCOM) to task project teams.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)92
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Supplies. • Special storage requirements by class.
 – Class 1: refrigeration and warehousing.
 –C l a s s  2 :  c o v e r .
 – Class 3: environmental control.
 – Class 4: real estate and implications for engineers.
 – Class 5: bulk off-take available.
• Location of storage for each commodity type.
• Impact on shelf life by class or nature.• Supply and storage of medical cold-chain and ambient 
temperature supply items.
• Reverse supply chain.
• DSCOM to task project teams.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 93
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Infrastructure and facilities 
- what is available and what 
are its capabilities and capacities?
• Identify key facilities availab le (for example, storage and 
refrigeration):
 – issues of obtaining permission to use;
 – capacity to handle Defence Support Chain throughput 
(in volumetric terms);
 – marshalling space for backlog, transport links to main 
supply routes;
 – force protection issues;
 – multinational issues;
 –c o s t ;
 –p o l i t i c a l  i s s u e s ;
 – power and water;
 – other users;
 – operational security; and
 –e x p l o s i v e  o r d n a n c e  c l e a r a n c e .
• Options for building and lead time to prepare for usage.
• Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ)-J4.
• Joint Force Logistic Component 
Headquarters (JFLogCHQ).
• Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).• Components.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)94
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Air ports of disembarkation. • Types of aircraft (including defensive aid suite 
requirement) that can use air ports of disembarkation:
 – ramp availability;
 – existing mechanical handling equipment;
 –h a n g a r  s p a c e ;
 – fuel storage;
 – passenger accommodation; and
 –e x p l o s i v e s  l i c e n c e .
• Other user requirements.
• Daily average and peak/surge capacity in number of 
aircraft.
• Force protection.
• FJLogHQ.• Air Command/2 Group.• PJHQ.• DSCOM.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 95
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Sea ports of disembarkation. • Berth types (suitability for roll-on/roll-off ferries):
 – mechanical handling equipment (suitability for 
container handling);
 – capacity to marshal shipping offshore;
 – warehouse space;
 –c u s t o m s ;
 – port authorities; and
 – suitability for bulk fuel, ammo etc.
• Daily average and peak/surge capacity in ships.
• Force protection.
• Logistic brigades.• JFLogCHQ.• PJHQ.• DSCOM.
• Accommodation. • Capacity in steady state and surge.
• Vehicle parking.
• Joint Forces Command.• Single-Service commands.
• Storage. • Covered space for detail and bulk stores and capacity 
(including container capacity).
• Ammunition storage capacity ; environmental protection; 
and proximity to other facilities.
• Material handling and infrastructure and loading ramps.
• Land component.• Air component (deployment operating 
base/air port of disembarkation/forward 
operating base).
• JFLogCHQ.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)96
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Main supply routes. • Average speed and capacity in trucks per day, time to 
transit/loops per day.
• Load limits; vehicle restrictions.
• Impact of weather on speed and capacity; loss to weather.• Capacity for reverse supply chain.
• Land component.
• PJHQ J4.• JFLogCHQ.
• External support:
 – host-nation support;
 – contractor support to 
operations;
 – multinational; and
 – in-country resources.
• Costs and risk to supply.• Lead times to contract.• Operations security issues.• Force protection issues.• Impact of operational risks on contractor availability, cost 
by class of supply.
• PJHQ J2.• PJHQ J8/9.• PJHQ Contractor logistics.• Industry/contractors.• Local Defence attache.• Defence Industrial Strategy.
2. Distance
• Strategic lines of 
communication – what 
is required to enable and support?
• Diplomatic clearances and timing.
• Airspace restrictions.• Assets available, lead time/cost for commercial shipping 
and aircraft.
• Capacity for reverse supply chain.
• DSCOM.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 97
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Forward mounting base:
 – is a forward mounting 
base needed;
 – what will its role be;
 – where will it be; and
 – what are the likely daily 
average and peak transit 
volumes?
• Forward mounting base roles include:
 – reception, staging and onward movement;
 – tactical air transport loading; and 
 – issuing ammunition/first line scales.
• Force protection arrangements.
• Diplomatic clearances/Customs.• Command and control structure for forward mounting 
base.
• Internal forward mounting base lines of communication:
 – freedom of movement; and
 – host-nation factors.
• PJHQ J5/J4.• As for air port of disembarkation and sea 
port of disembarkation.
• Strategic lift/intra-theatre 
lift.
• Distances.
• Times for flights/surface movement.• Possible choke-points.
• DSCOM.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)98
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Rear area security - what 
operation specific issues are 
there for security in the rear area?
• Operations security constraints.
• Sensitive installations, supplies, particularly movement in 
UK.
• Host-nation sensitivities and host-nation controls.
• Force protection.
• PJHQ J4.
• DSCOM.
3. Demand
• Force element table. • Difficult-to-move equipments in the force element table, 
impact on the Defence Support Chain.
• Force elements at readiness (FE@R) and required level of 
sustainment required.
• Joint Forces Command.• Single-Service commands.• DSCOM to task project teams.
• Priming equipment packs. • Timeliness of warning to Defence Equipment and Support 
(DE&S) to generate scales and materiel.
• Availability of materiel on shelf or from industry to meet 
timelines.
• Ability to generate priming equipment packs outload to 
meet force element timelines for deployment.
• Joint Forces Command.
• Single-Service commands.• DSCOM to task project teams.• Storage, Distribution and Technical 
Services.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 99
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Non-priming equipment 
packs deployment stocks.
• Consider:
 –a m m u n i t i o n ;
 – general materiel;
 –w e l f a r e ;
 – urgent operational requirements;
 – force level assets;
 – communication and information systems; and
 – contractor support to operations supplies (in terms of 
days of supply/daily consumption rate) holding levels 
for each commodity type.
• DSCOM to task project teams.
• Joint Forces Command.• Single-Service commands.• PJHQ J4.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)100
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Non-priming equipment 
packs deployed stocks 
(continued).
• Identify:
 –v o l u m e t r i c s ;
 – packaging and handling requirements;
 – mode of transport;
 – hazardous material;
 – point of arrival in joint operations area;
 – final destination; and
 – force protection requirements.
• Identify location of second and third line holding stocks 
for each node.
• Identify timelines for commitme nt to industry, available for 
dispatch.
• Identify UK base transport requirements particularly for 
hazardous material/ammunition.
• Identify reception, staging and onward movement 
requirements, including the need to break bulk.
• DSCOM to task project teams.
• Joint Forces Command.• Single-Service commands.• PJHQ J4.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 101
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Training (particularly 
in theatre) – impact of 
operation-specific training.
• Identify:
 – timing;
 – force elements involved;
 – level of activity; and
 – firing of specialist natures.
• Impact on Defence Support Chain to provide training 
(training stocks plus training support).
• Joint Forces Command.
• Single-Service commands.• Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC).• PJHQ J4.
• Sustainment consumption 
- what are the daily activity 
rates for each part of the force?
• Consider costs, force protection issues in all cases.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)102
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• The Whole Force. • Force laydown – including military force elements (regular 
and reserve) as well as industry and contractors.
• Inventory to be held at each location (in days of supply/
daily consumption rate at activity level) and theatre 
sustainability stock levels (in days of supply/daily consumption rate at activity level), by class of supply.
• Casualty and casualty evacuation rates in theatre and to 
UK – frequency and numbers.
• Fresh rations/operational ration packs; urgent operational 
requirements expected; procurement timelines; expected shipment dates; welfare package; Expeditionary Forces Institute stores and post (consider seasonal effects).
• Joint Forces Command.
• Single-Service commands.• PJHQ J4 and J5.• DE&S.
• Multinational. • Lead nation roles for UK and other nations with reliability 
of supply and resulting contingency measures.
• PJHQ J4.
• Detainees/internees. • Number and comp osition of detainees/internees needing 
support; likely infrastructure, life support and separation 
issues (gender, ethnicity and disabilities).
• PJHQ J4.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 103
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Supply arrangements. • Transport mode fo r each class of supply (or host-nation 
support/multinational/contractor support to operations) 
by point of entry and across joint operations area.
• Entry point into joint operations area and routes by class of 
supply to final destination.
• Expected delivery frequencies for delivering sustainment/
replenishing stocks.
• Surge arrangements.
• Reverse supply chain requirements.
• PJHQ J4.• Joint Forces Command.• Single-Service commands.• DSCOM.• Project teams.
4. Duration
• What are the activity 
levels across nodes in joint 
operations area?
• Activity level at each node for steady state and surge/peak. • DSCOM.
• Timeline of support 
arrangements.
• Impact on infrastructure investment - accommodation, 
force protection and so on.
• PJHQ J5.
• ACDS(Log Ops).
• Surge arrangements – with 
what warning timelines?
Impact air port of disembarkation/sea port of disembarkation 
factors.Impact on facilities.Impact on demand.
As for other factors.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)104
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Host-nation infrastructure. • Availability of and investment in host-nation infrastructure, 
particularly power, water, roads.
• PJHQ J4.
• Reception, staging and 
onward movement - what 
are the requirements to move, store, support force elements, materiel and equipment for reception, staging and onward movement?
• Reception, staging and onward movement transit volumes 
and impact on sustainment demand by nodes.
• Special equipment, information systems, material handling 
and infrastructure required.
• Transit accommodation.
• Impact on welfare package.• Personnel tracking.
• PJHQ J4.• Joint Mounting Cell (JMC).
• Roulement and rest and 
recuperation.
• Timing of roulement, rest and recuperation and for each 
service.
• Special arrangements for certain skills (for example, 
aircrew).
• Joint Forces Command.• Single-Service commands.• Joint mounting centres.
• Critical deadlines.• What are the deadlines that 
must be supported by the 
Defence Support Chain?
• What is the flexibility of 
those deadlines?
• Joint desired order of arrival – consider the Joint Task Force 
Commander’s requirement to have capability in certain locations.  Ensure that the real sustainability requirements are understood.
• Coalition – what requirements might be placed, either 
due to lead nation status or to meet political and military objectives?
• ACDS(Log Ops).
• PJHQ J5.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 105
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Immovable constraints.
• What constraints to meeting 
deadlines exist?
• What is the impact in 
operational terms?
• Procurement – particularly for undecided requirements.• Availability of strategic lift, particularly at medium scale 
and above – consider impact of multinational demand on 
world market.
• Infrastructure build.
• Political/diplomatic, memoranda of understanding, 
diplomatic clearances and so on.
• DSCOM.• DSCOM to task Project Teams.• ACDS(Log Ops).
5.  Performance management
• Overall. • What performance does the Defence Support Chain as a 
whole, and each element, require to deliver the plan?
• DSCOM.
• Standard priority system 
– what are the expected 
timelines for each priority code?
• Standard priority system matrix. • DSCOM.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)106
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Performance targets - what 
throughput and transit time 
is required for each node and route?
• Performance target matrix. • PJHQ J4.
• Accountabilities – how 
does the accountability for each target map on to the command and control structure?
• Accountability matrix embedded in commanders’ 
directives.
• Authority to deliver on accountabilities.
• Review mechanisms for performance against target.
• PJHQ J4.
• Measurement – what 
is required to capture 
performance data?
• Reports and returns.
• Logistic information systems - deployment locations, data 
capture and usage.
• Performance reporting requirements.
• PJHQ J4.• DSCOM.
6. Information, political and legal operations
• Budget – what is the 
budget for the operation 
and are there any specific constraints?
• Her Majesty’s Treasury can be expected to cap expenditure 
– therefore this cap needs to be quantified.
• PJHQ J8.
• ACDS(Log Ops).
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 107
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Financial control – what 
authorities and control 
mechanisms are in place?
• Accounting requirements.
• Civilian Secretariat resources.• Authorities for local purchase (including government 
procurement card).
• Timelines for procurement authorities.• Supply assurance regime.• Allocate a Special Operations Code.
• PJHQ J8.
• Media – what media 
presence and sensitivities are 
there?
• Logistic issues considered to be particularly sensitive.
• Capability to respond to media issues.• Information sources to respond to media and political 
questions (for example, media logistic information pack).
• ACDS(Log Ops).
• Allies – what political 
sensitivities are there 
regarding allies?
• Lead nation arrangements.
• Contractor support to operations commitments.• Timing of transfer of authority and so on.
• PJHQ J2.
• Host nation – what political 
sensitivities are there 
regarding the host nation?
• Memoranda of understanding.
• Customs.• Host nation expectations of local expenditure.
• PJHQ J2.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)108
Question area Deduction Responsibility
7. Externals
• Variance of transport.
• What are the likely causes of 
transport time variance?
• What impact might they 
have?
• How can they be mitigated?
• Weather and seasonal (for example, shipping, runway 
closure, surface degradation on main supply routes, snow, 
mountain passes).
• Loss of local contractors (for example, due to force 
protection issues; alternative demand from coalition).
• Force protection impact on frequency, speed and volume 
carrying capacity of main supply routes.
• DSCOM.
• JFLogCHQ.
• Other government 
departments/non-
governmental organisations.
• Impact on joint operations area.
• De-conflict ports of embarkation/disembarkation.• Infrastructure requirements.• Force protection requirements.
• PJHQ.
• Inventory – what are the 
likely causes of inventory 
losses and how can they be mitigated?
• Environmental factors, particularly for sensitive classes 
(ammunition, medical, food).
• Enemy action destroying inventories - identify need for 
redundancy.
• Loss of contractor support to operations inventories.
• Changes in policy.
• DSCOM
• JFLogCHQ.• ACDS(Log Ops).
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 109
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Material handling and 
infrastructure – what are the 
likely causes of variability in material handling and infrastructure and how can they be mitigated?
• Weather and seasonal (for example, suitability of outdoor 
storage).
• Reliability and availability of military and contractor 
mechanical handling equipment and trained operators.
• Loss of critical facilities due to political, economic or force 
protection issues.
• Loss of personnel due to illness or other tasks.
• Critical performance limits on material handling and 
infrastructure leading to sub-optimal processes (for 
example, container backlog leading to raiding by units) and recovery plans.
• DSCOM to task project teams for 
mechanical handling equipment.
• JFLogCHQ.
• Information exchange – 
what information are we required to share with allies?
• Situational awareness (logistic elements).
• Blue-on-blue avoidance.• Reports and returns.• Status of shared inventories.• Joint asset tracking.• Logistic information plan.
• PJHQ.• JFLogCHQ.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)110
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Logistic command, control 
and logistic information 
services – what linkages are required and where (joint operations area), strategic base)?
• Application interfaces.
• Communications.• Bandwidth.• Technical and security issues.• Installation, procurement, contractor support to 
operations timelines.
• PJHQ J6.• Director Inventory Management 
Operations Centre (Support Chain 
Information Services) (D IMOC (SCIS)).
8. Command and control
• Overall. • Command and control.
• Logistic information systems.
• Requirements – what must 
be achieved by logistic information systems?
• Recognised theatre logistic picture.
• Consignment tracking.• Inventory management.• Asset management.• Personnel management.• Allied compatibility.
• PJHQ J4.• D IMOC (SCIS).
• Applications. • Identify access to applications required at each node. • Joint Forces Command.
• Single-Service commands.
• DSCOM.
Logistic planning for operations

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
4D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 111
Question area Deduction Responsibility
• Hardware. • Identify required hardware. • Joint Forces Command.
• Single-Service commands.
• DSCOM.
• Bandwidth. • Identify information exchange requirements and impact 
on overall communication and information systems 
arrangements.
• DSCOM.
• PJHQ J6.
• Redundancy and 
reversionary modes.
• Identify required system redundancy.• Identify reversionary modes required.
• Joint Forces Command.• Single-Service commands.
9. Enemy
• Overall. • Capabilities (for example, regular; asymmetrical).
• Chemical, biological, radiation and nuclear threat.• Force protection considerations.
Logistic planning for operations

[Page 122: No extractable text]

Chapter 5 – 
Generating logistic 
force elements
Chapter 5 is the first of five chapters which focus on 
deploying, sustaining and recovering the force.
• Chapter 5 – Generating logistic force elements
• Chapter 6 – Logistic support to deployment
• Chapter 7 – Reception, staging, onward 
                         movement and integration
• Chapter 8 – Sustainment
• Chapter 9 – Restoring combat power
Logistics both:
• supports generating the deploying joint force; and
• generates its own force elements to deploy. 
This Chapter covers the generation of logistic force 
elements to support an operation.  The Chapter focuses 
on the logistic elements of the Whole Force and, within 
that, the Reserves and contractor support to operations.
Chapter 5
113
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
Section 1 – Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1 15
Section 2 – The Whole Force .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1 16

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)114
Leaders win through logistics. Vision, sure. 
Strategy, yes. But when you go to war, you need 
to have both toilet paper and bullets at the right 
place at the right time. In other words, you must 
win through superior logistics.
Tom Peters”
“
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 115
5.1. Force generation.  Force generation is: the process of providing suitably trained 
and equipped forces, and their means of deployment, sustainment and recovery to 
meet all current and potential future tasks, within required readiness and preparation 
times.104
5.2. Readiness.  In the UK, we operate a scale of gradua ted readiness to enable an 
effective response to an unknown crisis.  During the planning process, the MOD is 
responsible for reducing the notice-to-move of required force elements.  Figure 5.1 
outlines NATO, EU and UK readiness categories.
104  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database.
Section 1 – Introduction
NATO EU UK readiness 
category Code At ‘X’ days notice to move 
(maximum)
High readiness forces
Very High
Extremely High 
(EHR) R1
Two days or less (force elements 
can be held at anything from 
minutes notice-to-move to the 
full 48 hours)
Very High (VHR)
R2 Five days
High
R3 Ten days
High (HR)
R4 20 days
R5 30 days
Medium
R6 40 days
Medium
R7 60 days
R8 90 days
Forces with a lower 
state of readiness
Low
Low (LR) R9 180 days
Long term build-up 
forces (LTBF) Very Low (VLR)
R10 365 days
R11 More than 365 days
Figure 5.1 – Readiness categories
Chapter 5 – Generating 
logistic force elements
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)116
5.3. National assets.  The operational planning cycle n ormally dictates that those 
logistic assets held on the high readiness roster should be considered as the first 
logistic deployment option.  However, the nature of the operation may require 
other units or headquarters to be selected (for example, as part of a multinational 
force).  If logistic assets at lower readiness are chosen, logistic planners need to 
make sure these assets are the priority for training and equipment.  Those lower 
readiness logistic assets will then be able to effectively support deploying formations 
and integrate with other national components, joint organisations or nations.  In 
particular, communications and information support infrastructure needs to match 
the requirements of the deployed logistic information systems plan and be integrated 
into the deployed communications and information systems plan.  For similar 
reasons, planners must consider the notice required by industry when generating its 
contribution to the force.
5.4. Preparing logistic force elements.  Through force planning in the initial 
es
timate, planners determine what logistic force elements we need to best meet the 
operational need, allowing for their availability.  The force generation process should 
identify:
• potential economies of scale against the various readiness criteria of our 
force elements;
• availability of multinational logistic capabilities; and
• specific component support needs.  
Once the necessary logistic tasks and associated assets have been established, PJHQ 
identifies any shortfalls and constraints, considering the availability of logistic support 
from other sources.  This may be from multinational sources in a multinational/
combined operation, and/or from host-nation support.  From the outset, the logistic 
planner’s mindset should be to fully abide by the logistic principle of collective 
responsibility105 to enable the benefits to be realised.
5.5. Logistic force elements incl ude elements of the Whole Force106 within the 
strategic base and deployed through to the front line.  The Whole Force is formed 
from:
• regular and reserve Service personnel;
105  Collective responsibility encourages nations and NATO to cooperatively share logistic capabilities 
and resources to support the force effectively and efficiently (Chapter 1).
106  The term ‘Whole Force’ does not just apply to logistic force elements.
Section 2 – The Whole Force
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 117
• civil servants and strategic partners;
• contractors; 
• locally employed civilians;107 and
• external support elements. 
5.6. The Whole Force mix will vary from operation to operation.  Throughout the 
life-cycle of an operation, planners should consider the constraints and opportunities 
offered by adapting the Whole Force mix to best meet the developing logistic 
requirement.  For example, the ‘very high readiness’ Whole Force mix is likely to have 
a greater proportion of regular personnel than the force engaged in an enduring 
stabilisation operation as the latter may make greater use of Reserves, or contractors 
instead of Service personnel.
Reserves
5.7. A significant proportion of national military logistic manpower is held within the 
Reserves.  How we use those Reserves effectively is a major planning factor.  
5.8. Ministerial authority is required to mobilise reservists to undertake operations, 
in accordance with the Reserve Forces Act 1996 (RFA 96).108  We need to identify and 
select reservists who are suitable and willing to be mobilised for the operational 
requirement.  If there are not enough, it may be necessary to compulsorily mobilise 
reservists to make up the requirement.
5.9. Reservists can also serve on Full Time Reserve Service, where a reservist 
voluntarily serves under a full time employment contract – in many cases to do the 
same job as a regular.  Periods of service can vary but are generally up to four years.  
They still remain members of their respective Volunteer Reserve Service.  There are 
three forms of Full Time Reserve Service commitment:
• home commitment;
• limited commitment; and
• full commitment.
Members of the latter group can be deployed worldwide and have similar terms and 
conditions of service to regular Service personnel.  
107  Joint Service Publication (JSP) 567, Contractor Support to Operations: Locally Employed Civilians (LEC) 
are workers who are directly engaged by the MOD (for example, by the MOD’s Labour Support units) and 
who normally reside in the country or countries in which the contracted services are being performed.  
They include UK and troop contributing nations’ civilian personnel who permanently reside in theatre, as 
well as local nationals.  LECs are not contractors on deployed operations (CONDO) personnel.  LECs can be 
hired on a daily basis.
108  As amended by the Defence Reform Act 2014.
”
“
Throughout the 
life-cycle of 
an operation, 
planners should 
consider the 
constraints and 
opportunities 
offered by 
adapting the 
Whole Force mix 
to best meet 
the developing 
logistic 
requirement.
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)118
5.10. Owing to their likely mobilisation timescale, we should not rely exclusively on 
reservists delivering the logistic requirement during the early stages of an operation.  
There are, however, two reservist components that can give extra flexibility and are 
able to deploy more quickly.
• The high readiness reserve – is made up of individuals who voluntarily, and 
with their emplo
yer’s consent, accept an increased call out liability.
• Sponsored reserves – are civil servants or employees of MOD contractors 
who can b
e mobilised to provide the same capability in uniform that they 
deliver as civilians.
Contractor support to operations
5.1 1. Contractors can provide a significant number of enabling functions, primarily 
through service delivery contracts,109 to assist with generating, deploying, sustaining 
and recovering the force.  This may include complete, discrete capabilities110 and 
those elements of support delivered by contractors to force elements as part of a 
support solution.  Such an approach may offer an extra (or occasionally the only) 
option for meeting operational support requirements.  Using contractor support 
to operations (CSO) requires timely planning and exercising by both the MOD 
and industry.  Deployed military forces may face tasks for which they would not 
be expected to be fully capable,111 such as redeveloping national infrastructure.112  
Contracting is a significant means by which the Commander can introduce resources, 
services and capability to the force to conduct those tasks.
5.12. Ministry of Defence policy.  Joint Service Publication (JSP) 567 , Co ntractor 
Support to Operations describes how the MOD uses CSO.  There are three guiding 
principles that we should consider when planning for and using CSO.
a. Assured support.  CSO capability must provide an assured service for the 
milit
ary commander.  The contract sponsor should make contingency plans to 
cover both the risk of contractors not delivering and a deteriorating operational 
situation and threat environment that precludes deploying, or continuing to 
use, contractor personnel.  Command and control of CSO capability must be 
integrated with that of the force.
109  Service delivery contracts enable supplier personnel (frequently skilled or technical), interacting 
with customer personnel, to use agile, flexible processes to provide varying outputs, both tangible and 
intangible, to create value for the customer and supplier in achieving joint outcomes.
110  Contracting for capability.
111  Through lack of training or equipment or, simply, in the face of the required scale.
112 JSP 567, Contractor Support to Operations .
“
Contracting is 
a significant 
means by 
which the 
Commander 
can introduce 
resources, 
services and 
capability to 
the force.
”
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 119
b. Value for Defence.  CSO is only viable if the proposition is attractive to 
the p
otential contractors.  At the same time, however, CSO must demonstrate 
value for Defence.  The MOD will consider the cost of CSO against the change in 
operational benefit and risk.113
c. Safe and secure environment.  The operational environment in which 
C
SO is delivered must be sufficiently safe and secure.  The MOD provides 
force protection for contractor personnel (within the contractual obligations) 
to a level commensurate with the threat, as determined by the local military 
commander.  If the security environment deteriorates to the extent that we can 
no longer provide sufficient force protection, the Commander should consider 
withdrawing CSO.
5.13. Types of contractor support.  Contractors are involved in a widening range of 
roles and f
unctions resulting from:
• a smaller military force;
• increased outsourcing of logistic functions; and
• introducing highly technical weapons and equipment systems into service.
CSO policy covers three categories of contracted personnel:
• contractors on deployed operations (CONDO);
• private military and security companies; and
• sponsored reserves. 
5.14. Contractors on deployed operations.  CONDO is the term used to describe the 
deliv
ery of contracted capability within an operational area.  It may include contractor 
logistic support arrangements and the Operational Support Capability Contract 
(OSCC).  CONDO is the term used in contracts which apply Defence Condition 
(DEFCON) 697 as a specific requirement.
• Contractor logistic support is where in-service equipment is supported 
through a contract with the equipment provider.
• The PJHQ OSCC is a pre-competed contract for contract support to 
operations.  The contract can be used to access a range of logistic services 
from an industry partner with global reach.  The OSCC can only be used after 
113  When considering the total cost of contractor support to operations (CSO), we should include 
the indirect costs to the MOD, such as providing: force protection (for both manpower and equipment); 
life support (including medical support, in accordance with the medical rules of eligibility); and 
transportation for contractor personnel.
“
CSO is only 
viable if the 
proposition 
is attractive to 
the potential 
contractors 
but must also 
demonstrate 
value for 
Defence. 
”
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)120
all other Defence, or Defence commercial, solutions have been proved to be 
unsuitable.
5.15. Private military and security companies.  Personnel employed under CONDO 
arrangemen
ts remain the employees of the contractor and retain their civilian 
status.  CONDO employed by the UK are not authorised to fulfil an armed role.  
Civilians deploying in armed roles must do so under private military and security 
company114 contracts.  The contracts are tightly controlled at the highest MOD level.115  
Private military and security companies must agree to comply with the Montreaux 
Document116 and have signed the International Code of Conduct (Private Security 
Service Providers) before the MOD can use them.  
5.16. Sponsored reserves.  Sponsored reserves are members of a civilian workforce 
who are re
quired to join the Volunteer Reserves as a condition of a contract between 
their civilian employer and the MOD.  They provide a capability on operations117 as 
well as under normal conditions.  Depending on the threat assessment, sponsored 
reserves may deploy to an operational area without mobilising, under CONDO 
arrangements.  They can be mobilised later, if the theatre threat assessment 
deteriorates, and so continue delivering in-theatre support uninterrupted.  Sponsored 
reserves should be routinely used in the initial force generation cycle.
5.17. Planning contractor support to operations.  As early as possible in the force 
genera
tion process, planners should consider the level of contracting capability 
within the Whole Force, together with the associated constraints.118  Contractors need 
to understand, and operate within, the bounds of military doctrine, as well as the 
military commander’s concept of operations.  This ensures that contractor support 
requirements are identified early, CSO’s contribution can be fully optimised and 
any risks can be identified and managed.  Both planned and ad hoc contracting can 
release military manpower for other tasks.  However, the planned approach is more 
likely to make best use of both military and civilian support capabilities.
114  The term applies to all private military and security companies wherever they are registered or 
based, and to their local subcontractors.  It does not apply to Defence industry contractors if their activity 
is regulated through existing export controls, an export licence has been issued or the commercial 
proposals are wholly within the terms of that licence.  Additionally, unarmed contractors providing 
logistic support on operations to the MOD and covered by JSP 567, Contractor Support to Operations , and 
private security companies that operate solely in the UK domestic market are not classified as private 
military and security companies.
115  Secretary of State for Defence approval is required in each case.
116  Montreux Document on Pertinent International Legal Obligations and  Good Practices of State Related 
to Operations of Private Military and Security Companies during Armed Conflict agreed to by 51 governments, 
EU, OSCE and NATO.
117  During Operation HERRICK, over 2000 personnel held sponsored reserve status at any one time, 
across a diverse range of military capabilities.  For example, providing the strategic sea lift requirement or 
delivering armour and mechanised infantry vehicles to the battlefield using tank transporters are heavily 
dependent on sponsored reserves.  
118  Such constraints may include contractors’ legal capacity to operate in theatre and MOD’s liability 
towards them and their personnel (for example, force protection or medical support).
“
Sponsored 
reserves 
provide a 
capability on 
operations 
as well as 
under normal 
conditions and 
they should 
routinely be 
used in the 
initial force 
generation cycle.
”
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 121
a. Planned CSO deliberately determin es what operational support can be 
better met by contracting a commercial provider.  A planned approach identifies 
the likely contracting ‘footprint’ from force elements attributed to the operation 
and from other discrete deployed capabilities which may be contracted.  The 
MOD can then plan the necessary force protection and real-life support to 
meet its duty of care.  Contractors selected before an operation should be 
incorporated into the operational support planning process to ensure their 
capabilities are integrated.  The deployment and redeployment of contractors, 
whether or not using their own resources, should be included.
b. Ad hoc contracting, by contrast, can either be a:
• reactive outsourcing for capabilities not met through force generation; or
• response to unforeseen requirements arising during an operation.
The last-minute nature of ad hoc contracting, and the time required to secure 
funding approval, can increase costs and cause delay.  We can reduce this by 
integrating industry partners into the planning and force generation process so 
that they can be more readily engaged when the need arises.
5.18. Managing contractor support risk.  Operational experience, particularly during 
the early s
tages, highlighted the need to consider CSO risk during the force planning 
process.119  Should contractors be withdrawn (by the MOD) or withdraw (under 
company orders) from an operational area, the military risk of operational failure may 
be significant.  The joint commander should therefore ensure measures are in place 
to minimise the risks to contractors (and their personnel and equipment) in the joint 
operations area.  Contractors must be brought into the planning process as early as 
possible and their appetite for risk should be assessed.  Operational experience has 
shown that contractors are reasonably resilient, provided they understand the risks 
in the operation.  Joint risk registers are a means of sharing risk with contractors, 
agreeing ownership of risks and mitigation.
5.19. Mitigating contractor support risk.  Contingencies against CSO arrangements 
f
ailing may include maintaining a military capability and using Reserves (including 
sponsored reserves).  Using long-term partnership arrangements may provide 
additional risk mitigation.  Such arrangements help develop military-commercial 
relationships and encourage contractors to engage early in the planning cycle.  
Currently, CSO not only augments but is increasingly replacing military capability, 
once operations become established.  Even while using contractors, planners should 
119  JSP 892, Risk Management, Chapter 8, Section 4 provides further information on risk.
“
Operational 
experience has 
shown that 
contractors 
are reasonably 
resilient, 
provided they 
understand the 
risks in the 
operation. 
”
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)122
recognise operational risk exists and continue to consider support from other sources, 
such as:
• host nations; 
• international partners;
• multinational organisations;120 or 
• other government departments. 121
120  For example, NATO (perhaps through NATO Support Agency or the Operational Logistic Support 
Partnership) or the European Union.
121  For example, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office or Department for International Development.
Key points 
• Force generation is: the process of pr oviding suitably trained and equipped 
forces, and their means of deployment, sustainment and recovery to meet all 
current and potential future tasks, within required readiness and preparation 
times.  (JDP 0-01.1, UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database).
• If the operation requires logistic asset s at lower readiness, planners need to 
ensure they are given training and equipment priority.  They will then be able to 
support the deploying force and integrate with other components and nations as 
the combined joint force builds up.
• The logistic planner should act on the logi stic principle of collective responsibility 
from the outset, seeking to realise its benefits.  Supporting that approach, the 
logistic force generation process should identify:
• potential economies of scale;
• availability of multinational logistic capabilities; and
• specific component support needs.
• Shortfalls should be met from other sour ces such as the Reserves, civil servants, 
locally employed civilians or contractor support to operations (CSO) which, with 
regular personnel, form the Whole Force.
• Planning should compensate for the time needed to mobilise reservists.  Using 
the high readiness reserve and sponsored reserves reduces the effect of that 
delay.
Generating logistic force elements

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
5
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 123
Key points (continued)
• CSO enables the commercial sector to provide deployed support to the force, 
offering the Commander access to more resources, services and capability.  CSO 
is usually delivered through Service Delivery contracts.  There are three guiding 
principles to its use.
• Assured support to the force.
• Value for Defence.
• A safe and secure environment for contractors.
• Types of CSO include:
• contractors on deployed operations;
• private military and security companies; and
• sponsored reserves.
• Planned CSO is likely to make best use of the mix of military and civilian support 
while ad hoc contracting can provide more flexibility but at greater cost and delay.
• Using CSO can increase operational risk.  Planners should reflect that risk during the 
planning process and it should be managed by sharing ownership and mitigation 
between the MOD and the contractors.
Generating logistic force elements

[Page 134: No extractable text]

Logistic support to 
deployment
Chapter 6 outlines the processes, command and control, 
linkages and key documents through which logistics 
supports successful deployments.
J5/J3 lead deployment planning and execution and J4 is a 
key enabler.
Chapter 6
125
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
Section 1 – Mounting   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 127
Section 2 – Deployment planning   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 128
Section 3 – Deployment execution .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 132
Section 4 – Coupling Bridge  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 135

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)126
Logistics comprises the means and arrangements 
which work out the plans of strategy and tactics. 
Strategy decides where to act; logistics brings the 
troops to this point.
General Antoine Henri Jomini”
“
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 127
6.1. Definition.  Mounting is defined as: all prep arations made in areas designated 
for the purpose, in anticipation of an operation.  It includes assembly in the mounting 
area, preparation and maintenance within the mounting area, movement to loading 
points and subsequent embarkation into ships, craft or aircraft if applicable.122 
6.2. UK context.  In the UK, the Detailed Deployment P lan directs those tasks that 
we need to coordinate during the mounting process.  The plan allocates strategic lift 
assets and details how we intend to embark our personnel, equipment and cargo 
(Section 2).  Mounting includes:
• identifying and preparing forc es, their equipment and stores;
• briefing; and
• transporting them to the port of embarkation, most commonly via the Joint 
Air Mounting Centre or a sea mounting centre.
6.3. Mounting command and control.  Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) is the 
c
ontrolling headquarters for all deployed joint operations and major joint exercises.123  
While mounting a joint force, PJHQ directs or coordinates the activities of:
• Joint Forces Command and the single-Service commands;
• Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S);
• other government departments (OGD);
• industry; and
• contractors.124 
122  Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-06, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions.
123  Single-Service commands can be nominated as mounting headquarters, particularly when 
deploying force elements are drawn primarily from a single-Service.
124  Contractors should be mounted by the Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements’ 
(DSCOM) Contractors on Deployed Operations (CONDO) Mounting Cell, coordinated through CONDO 
project managers, authorised by the PJHQ J4 Contractor Support to Operations Cell and in close liaison 
with the PJHQ J4 Joint Mounting Cell.
Section 1 – Mounting
Chapter 6 – Logistic support 
to deployment
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)128
Mounting is a J3-directed activity and functional responsibility for mounting lies with 
PJHQ’s Assistant Chief of Staff (ACOS) J1/J4.125
a. J4 Joint Mounting Cell.  The J4 Joint Mounting Cell provides a standing 
op
erational-level focus within PJHQ for the command and control, coordination 
and development of the operational mounting process.  At the start of planning 
for an operation, the Joint Mounting Cell works with J5/J3 guidance and closely 
with Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM) and 
single-Service commands.  They plan, refine and direct the joint force’s 
mounting activities during the deployment, sustainment and redeployment 
phases.  In so doing, the cell coheres the joint management of the operational 
mounting process to deliver capability to operational theatres to meet the 
Chief of Joint Operations’ (CJO) intent.  The cell marries the requirement with 
resources, in the most efficient manner within operational constraints.  
b. J4 Movement Cell.  The J4 Movement Cell coordinates calling forward force 
elemen
ts with single-Service commands and DSCOM Movement Operations.  
The cell executes the movement plan generated during the operational 
mounting process.  It is also responsible for assisting DSCOM Movement 
Operations to de-conflict and resource theatre-demanded sustainment 
requirements alongside sustainment deployment serials.
6.4. Planning and estimate process.  The planning and estimate pro cess, described in 
Chapter 4, underpins all pre-deployment activity.  Estimate outputs define:
• the lines of communication;
• initial support; and
• the required level of sustainment for both initial and full operating capability 
of the joint force.
The Joint Mounting Cell assumes most of the planning, liaison and directing workload 
that PJHQ J3/5 would otherwise undertake.  The cell’s main output is the Detailed 
Deployment Plan.  Figure 6.1 outlines the deployment planning process.
125  J1-J9 are recognised military branches.  J1 – personnel; J3 – operations; J4 – logistics; and J5 – plans.
Section 2 – Deployment planning
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 129
6.5. Detailed Deployment Plan.  The Detailed Deployment Plan exists as a set 
of d
ynamic instructions rather than a single document.  The plan draws from 
the Strategic Mounting and Movement Directive (a generic directive that covers 
the operational mounting process for all operations).  Once further details of the 
operation are confirmed, and depending on their lead time, the following documents 
are produced. 
a. Warning order.  The warning order identifies emerging specifics regarding 
wh
y, who, where and what (resources) might be required. 
b. Fragmentary order.  A fragmentary order (FragO) directs specific changes 
t
o the Joint Mounting Order element of the Strategic Mounting and Movement 
Directive.  The FragO details the ‘why, who and what’ for the operation and 
includes the Coupling Bridge annex.  That annex details operational specifics of 
where, when and what is needed to operate the Coupling Bridge.  This draws 
heavily on the Joint Commander’s Directive and may (where time allows) be 
included within it for brevity and coherence.  Single-Service commands may 
MOD
PJHQ
FLC/DE&S
Unit
Q
Q
&S
Legend
CDS Chief of the Defence Staff
CJO Chief of Joint Operations
DE&S FET Defence Equipment and Support force   
element table
DSCOM  Defence Support Chain Operations and
   Mov Ops    Movements Movement Operations
FLC FET Front line command force element  table
JDOA Joint desired order of arrival
JFET Joint force element table
JTFHQ Joint Task Force Headquarters
JSOR Joint statement of requirement
Jt Comd Joint Commander
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
PJHQ
Estimate
CDS’ Directive
JFET JTFHQ
DE&S FETFLC FET
Unit input
JSOR
Jt Comd’s 
Directive JDOA
DSCOM Mov Ops 
Resourcing
Refine
Refine
Refine
Refine
Figure 6.1 – Deployment planning process
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)130
issue subordinate instructions (based on the detail of the FragO) to direct 
administrative arrangements for their sub-units, supporting the operational 
mounting process.
c. Joint Statement of Requirement.  After the Operations Directorate endorses 
the milit
ary strategic estimate, PJHQ issues Commands and DE&S with a list of 
capabilities required in the operation.  This is known as the Joint Statement of 
Requirement (JSOR).  The JSOR details those tasked to provide force elements to 
the operation and enables single-Service, or organisational, force element tables 
to be drafted.  The personnel element of the JSOR is set out in the operational 
establishment table, which PJHQ J3 creates and maintains.  
d. Joint force element table.  The J4 Joint Mounting Cell is the focus for force 
elemen
t table submissions and iteratively staffs them for accuracy.  The product 
is consolidated into the joint force element table (JFET) and submitted to 
PJHQ J3 to be checked against the Joint Statement of Requirement.  The final 
JFET is then issued under PJHQ J3 authority and becomes the authoritative 
document governing the shape and size of the deploying force.  The table 
comprehensively lists force elements in capability groups but is not as detailed 
as the staff tables used by individual commands.  As well as informing the Joint 
Task Force Commander (JTFC) of capabilities, equipment and initial operating 
stocks availability, the JFET highlights capability gaps for PJHQ J3 to resolve.  
Single-Service commands will be required to consider the contracting footprint 
needed to support the JFET.
e. Joint desired order of arrival.  The joint desired order of arrival (JDOA) is the 
join
t force element table with force elements prioritised according to required 
loading, movement and delivery dates.  All JDOA serials are annotated with:
• a ready to move (RTM) date;
• a preferred arrival date (PAD); and
• a required delivery date (RDD).
The JDOA is also produced iteratively and must match the Commander’s intent.  
For example, it should define the force posture required on arrival in theatre to 
inform:
• the order in which capabilities are deployed;
• how cargo is stowed; and
• shipping plans. 
“
As well as 
informing 
the Joint 
Task Force 
Commander  
of capabilities, 
equipment 
and initial 
operating stocks 
availability, 
the JFET 
highlights 
capability gaps 
for PJHQ J3 to 
resolve.
”
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 131
Some logistic resources (particularly joint logistic enablers and assets) should 
deploy early to support in-theatre reception, staging, onward movement and 
integration and facilitate theatre activation.126
6.6. Speed of deployment.  The duration of the operational deployment phase is a 
k
ey planning consideration as it determines how soon a commander can deliver the 
intended operational effect.  The speed of deployment largely depends on availability 
of movement resources and (to a lesser extent) the capacity to receive force elements 
into the joint operations area.
6.7 . Movement resources.  A combination of strategic air and sea lift is used to 
deliv
er the Chief of Joint Operation’s deployment intent, although rail or road may 
also be considered.  However, commercial charter is also used for all but the smallest 
operations and the earliest stages of a deployment.
a. Shipping.  MOD-owned shipping (for example, Royal Fleet Auxiliary vessels) 
an
d MOD-leased roll-on/roll-off ferr ies may be prepared in advance and 
pre-positioned if there is sufficient warning time.  Deploying MOD-controlled 
shipping in advance allows materiel to arrive in theatre earlier than would be 
possible using chartered vessels.  The latter ordinarily take at least 30 days to 
charter on the commercial market and that process cannot begin until there has 
been a definite decision to deploy.  MOD-controlled sealift is limited but, unless 
the size of load or scale of deployment dictates otherwise, is the preferred 
option.
b. Airlift.  Air transport will normally be allocated to personnel and high 
priorit
y equipment.  When considering air in favour of sea or land transport, 
planners should balance delivery speed against capacity and cost.  Commercial 
airlift charter may be achieved at shorter notice than a sealift charter as enabling 
arrangements normally allow 14 days to lease/contract large aircraft.  Without 
applying political influence, 14 days is also the standard minimum time needed 
to obtain diplomatic clearances for access and overflight.  
6.8. Personnel and equipment.  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 1-05, Pe rsonnel 
Support for Joint Operations details the personnel issues and Allied Joint Publication 
(AJP)-4.10(B), Allied Joint Doctrine for Medical Support (with UK national elements) 
details medical preparation factors to be considered during the deployment phase.  
The detailed deployment plan is used to coordinate the preparation and mounting of 
personnel and their equipment.  The administrative aspects of preparing personnel 
for deployment include:
126  Theatre activation is enabled by joint logistic enablers; Chapter 3 provides more detail.
“
The duration of 
the operational 
deployment 
phase is a 
key planning 
consideration as 
it determines 
how soon a 
commander 
can deliver 
the intended 
operational 
effect. 
”
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)132
• issuing specialist clothing;
• fitness screening; and
• providing force health protection measures tailored to the likely hazards/
 threats in the joint operations area, in time to ensure optimal protection 
 when entering theatre.  
6.9. Training.  Pre-deployment training within the strategic base and in-theatre 
will b
e mandatory for all personnel deploying to a joint operations area.  Detailed 
training requirements are set out in the Joint Commander’s Operational Directive but 
commands remain responsible for programming and directing individual, collective 
and specialist training.  
6.10. Responsibilities.  Reducing the notice-to-move of deploying force elements 
re
quires MOD approval.  Once that is obtained, PJHQ issues further coordinating 
instructions, drawn from the Detailed Deployment Plan.  It also distributes the joint 
force element table and joint desired order of arrival, which are effectively the first set 
of call-forward coordinating instructions used by the operational mounting process’ 
stakeholders.  
6.1 1. Load allocation table.  DSCOM Movement Operations creates a load allocation 
t
able (LAT) from the joint force element table and joint desired order of arrival.  The 
table assigns personnel, equipment and stores (from an individual through to an 
entire capability) to specific strategic lift, forming loads suitable to each lift asset.  
The LAT also allots re-supply and sustainment stocks to strategic lift.  During the 
deployment execution stage, a revised LAT is produced every time a joint force 
element table or joint desired order of arrival is issued or amended.  Producing the 
LAT is the second part of the call-forward coordinating instructions process and 
defines a transfer of responsibility within the PJHQ mounting and deployment 
process.  
6.12. Strategic base movement.  Once the load allocation t able has been published, 
the J4 Movements Cell (with DSCOM) is responsible for moving force elements.  After 
receiving the load allocation table, commands adjust the notice-to-move of their 
own force elements (as directed by PJHQ).  Commands are also responsible for issuing 
their own call-forward and movement instructions.  They then move their formations, 
units, personnel and equipment from strategic base locations to the points of 
embarkation.
Section 3 – Deployment execution
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 133
6.13. Execution process.  Executing the Detailed Deployment Plan requires flexibility 
t
o cater for changes in circumstances and in the Joint Task Force Commander’s 
priorities.  The PJHQ J3 Operations Team approves all changes to the Detailed 
Deployment Plan.  Commands or the Joint Task Force Commander may request 
changes to the plan and should seek approval through the PJHQ J4 Joint Mounting 
and Movements cells.  The JFET-JDOA-LAT127 process is iterative throughout the 
deployment phase.  There are therefore likely to be frequent changes in movement 
dates, capability requirements and allocation of lift assets.  Figure 6.2 shows the 
deployment execution process.
6.14. Coordinating strategic movement.  Strategic movement is directed by the PJHQ 
J4 M
ovements Cell and managed by DSCOM.  The Joint Task Force Headquarters 
Force Movement Control Centre coordinates the theatre end of the Coupling Bridge 
(including at the forward mounting base, if one is used).  This ensures force elements 
flow smoothly through any Coupling Bridge choke points and maximises route 
capacities.
127  Joint force element table-joint desired order of arrival-load allocation table.
MODPJHQFLC/DE&SUnit
Legend
DE&S  Defence Equipment and Support 
DSCOM Mov Ops Defence Support Chain Operations and 
Movements Movement Operations
FLC Front line command
JAMC Joint Air Mounting Centre
JDOA (DOAST) Joint desired order of arrival (desired 
order of arrival staff table)
JOA Joint operations area
NTM Notice to move
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
POD Port of disembarkation
POE Port of embarkation
SMC Sea mounting centre
NTM/Deployment 
approval
JDOA (DOAST) Monitor Coupling Bridge flow
FLC/DE&S call forward   
to unit/depot
Unit/Depot 
initiate movement
JAMC/SMC POE POD
Monitor and 
movement
JOA
DSCOM Mov Ops 
movement 
resourcing
Execution phase
Reporting
Call forward 
coordination 
instruction to 
FLC/DE&S
Figure 6.2 – Deployment execution process 
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)134
6.15. Movement information requirement.  A smooth deployment, particularly 
e
ffective reception, staging, onward movement and integration, needs accurate 
information covering:
• departures;
• delays;
• re-routing; and
• arrivals.
Details of the movement information requirement are defined in the strategic 
movement and consignment tacking instructions (both are issued by the PJHQ 
J4 Movements Cell).  Reliable information on the identity and timings of force 
elements arriving in theatre can assist with their achieving readiness in theatre.  The 
information allows the Joint Task Force Headquarters to accurately schedule 
in-theatre training and preparation.  That then eases the subsequent burden on the 
reception organisation.  The deployed logistic command and control node128 has an 
important role in supplying force element arrival information to both PJHQ and the 
commands.
6.16. Sustaining force deployment.  Logistic support to force deployment overlaps 
the s
ustainment phase.129
• DSCOM provides materiel support to a deploying force from the strategic 
base, as directed by PJHQ.
• DSCOM and commands identify the sustainment requirements of the 
deploying force during the initial planning process.
• DSCOM then produces its own force el ement table for inclusion in the joint 
force element table.
• Sustainment stocks are factored into the joint desired order of arrival (and 
afloat support loading lists) and are allocated to strategic lift assets through 
the load allocation table.
• As the operation develops, there will be a gradual change in emphasis from 
strategic base-‘push’ (sustaining the initial deployment) to joint operations 
area-‘pull’ (to meet demands placed by deployed force elements).  This may 
include a significant amount of host-nation support and contractor support 
to achieve.
128  Options include: Joint Task Force Headquarters J1/J4 team, the Joint Force Logistic Component 
Headquarters (JFLogCHQ) or a single component headquarters.  Chapter 2 provides detail.
129  Chapter 8 covers sustainment in further detail.
“
As the 
operation 
develops, there 
will be a 
gradual change 
in emphasis 
from strategic 
base-‘push’  
to joint 
operations 
area-‘pull’.
”
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 135
• The exact timing of transitions between phases differs for each operation but 
generally occurs when all force elements and initial sustainment stocks are in 
theatre.
• As an operation ends, joint operations area-‘pull’ is replaced by joint 
operations area-‘push’, to assist with returning materiel to the strategic base.
Figure 6.3 outlines the changes in how sustainment demand is influenced across the 
operational phases.
6.17. The Coupling Bridge is the series of activities through which force elements 
and materiel are delivered from the strategic base to the joint operations area, 
and returned, in accordance with the Joint Task Force Commander’s priorities.  The 
Coupling Bridge includes all the strategic assets, infrastructure and facilities required 
to achieve this task.  The Coupling Bridge starting point is the strategic base port of 
embarkation.  It ends in the joint operations area when materiel and force elements 
Logistic ‘push’ Logistic ‘push’Logistic ‘pull’
Deployment phase
Strategic base ‘push’
· Required during Joint Force 
deployment.
· Used to ‘prime’ sustainability.
· Especially if logistic situational 
awareness is poor.
JOA ‘pull’
· More eﬀective as soon as Joint 
Force deployed.
· Requires good logistic situational 
awareness.
· Optimises logistic footprint.
JOA ‘push’
· Redeploy Joint Force.
Logistic C2 
reaches FOC 
in JOA
Joint Task 
Force RSOI 
complete
JOA reaches 
operational 
logistic maturity
Redeployment 
of Joint Task 
Force
Legend
C2 Command and control
FOC Full operating capability
JOA Joint operations area
RSOI Reception, staging, onward 
movement and integration
Sustainment phase Redeployment phase
Section 4 – Coupling Bridge
Figure 6.3 – Influences on sustainment demand 
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)136
physically depart the port of disembarkation.130  This allows the Joint Commander to 
generate maximum operational effect across its whole length. 
6.18. Coupling Bridge command and control.  The Joint Commander exercises 
c
ommand and control of the Coupling Bridge and the operational directive defines 
its exact boundaries for the operation.  That directive may appoint a coupling bridge 
commander and outline what support is required from commands and DE&S.  The 
commands and DE&S are supporting commands for the Coupling Bridge and retain 
operational command of the strategic lift assets it uses.  Chief of Joint Operations 
may need to provide strategic guidance and prioritisation when there is more than 
one coupling bridge, each supporting geographically dispersed, but concurrent, 
operations.  Using priorities set by the Joint Task Force Commander, the deployed 
logistic command and control node normally controls the flow of personnel and 
materiel into theatre.  However, the Joint Commander retains the ability to influence 
the flow of materiel and force elements.
6.19. The Purple Gate.  The Purple Gate is the conceptual single point of entry from 
the s
trategic base into the Defence Support Chain.  The Purple Gate regulates131 
materiel flow into the support chain:
• from DE&S project teams;
• through contractor logistic support arrangements; or
• directly from industry.
This also enables materiel flow to be prioritised and tracked across the Coupling 
Bridge.  In reality, the conceptual single point of entry comprises several individually 
nominated physical locations.
• RAF stations.
• Naval bases.
• Commercial ports (sea and air).
• Supply depots (military or industry). 
• Her Majesty’s ships, when deployed.
DSCOM Logistic Operations may nominate additional purple gate nodes and they can 
be located in theatre.132
130  Joint Service Publication (JSP) 886, Defence Logistics Support Chain Manual , Volume 1, Part 1, 
Chapter 1; to be subsumed by the Defence Logistic Framework during 2015.
131  As detailed in the Constraints, Standards and Rules within the Defence Logistic Framework.
132  JSP 886, Defence Logistics Support Chain Manual , Volume 3, Part 3, Chapter 2; to be subsumed by the 
Defence Logistic Framework during 2015.
“
The Coupling 
Bridge starting 
point is the 
strategic 
base port of 
embarkation.  
It ends in the 
joint operations 
area when 
materiel 
and force 
elements 
physically depart 
the port of 
disembarkation.
”
Logistic support to deployment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
6
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 137
Key points 
• Mounting is defined as: all preparations made in areas designated for the purpose, in 
anticipation of an operation.  It includes assembly in the mounting area, preparation 
and maintenance within the mounting area, movement to loading points and 
subsequent embarkation into ships, craft or aircraft if applicable. 
• Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) J3 directs the mounting process while 
functional responsibility lies with the PJHQ J4 Joint Mounting and Movement Cells.  
The cells liaise with Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM), 
Joint Forces Command and single-Service commands.
• The detailed deployment plan directs the tasks required during the mounting 
process.  The plan includes: warning orders; fragmentary orders; joint statements 
of requirement (JSOR); operational establishment tables (OET); joint force element 
tables (JFET); joint desired orders of arrival (JDOA); and load allocation tables (LAT).
• The JFET-JDOA-LAT process is iterative throughout the deployment phase.  With the 
issue of the LAT, functional responsibility for deployment execution shifts from the 
PJHQ J4 Mounting Cell to the Movements Cell but is still directed by PJHQ J3.
• When allocating loads to strategic lift assets, planners need to balance the speed and 
availability of air assets with the volume and economy of shipping.
• While strategic movement is managed by DSCOM, the Force Movement Control 
Centre coordinates the theatre end of the Coupling Bridge and depends on current 
and reliable movement information.
• The Coupling Bridge is the series of activities through which force elements 
and materiel are delivered from the strategic base to the joint operations area, 
and returned.  The Coupling Bridge supports the deployment, sustainment and 
redeployment phases.
• The Purple Gate is the conceptual single point of entry from the strategic base into 
the Defence Support Chain and the Coupling Bridge.  In reality, it may have several 
nodes at different physical locations.
Logistic support to deployment

[Page 148: No extractable text]

Reception, staging, 
onward movement 
and integration
Chapter 7 outlines the phased process of reception, 
staging, onward movement and integration (RSOI).  In 
Section 2, it describes the capabilities required in, and the 
key elements affecting, the conduct of reception, staging 
and onward movement (RSOM), acknowledging that 
integration activities are J3-led.
Chapter 7
139
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
Section 1 – Reception, staging, onward movement 
                       and integration process  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 141
Section 2 – Reception, staging and 
                      onward movement capabilities.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 148

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)140
The essence of flexibility is in the mind of the 
commander; the substance of flexibility is in 
logistics.
Rear Admiral Henry Eccles, 
United States Navy
”
“
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 141
Introduction
7.1. Reception, staging, onward movement and integration (RSOI) describes 
the series of activities that enable force elements arriving in theatre to reach full 
operating capability in the joint force.  The process is complex, often prolonged and 
frequently dispersed.  In coalition or multinational operations, separate national 
forces may conduct RSOI concurrently.  Real estate, resource and facility use therefore 
needs to be coordinated and de-conflicted.  Though usually coordinated by the Joint 
Logistic Support Group,133 RSOI remains an individual national responsibility unless 
specifically directed otherwise (for example, when a logistic lead nation134 is tasked 
with delivering RSOI for the multinational force).  
7.2. During the reception, staging and onward movement (RSOM) phases, 
the deployed joint logistic headquarters135 is likely to be the delegated RSOM 
headquarters and, as such, would be the supported headquarters.  The integration 
process is J3-led.136  Figure 7.1 (overleaf) outlines the RSOI process.
133  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.6(B), Allied Joint Doctrine for the Joint Logistic Support Group , 
Chapter 4, Section 2 and Chapter 6, Section 2, April 2014.
134  Chapter 2 and AJP-4.9(A), Allied Joint Doctrine for Modes of Multinational Logistic Support, Chapter 2, 
February 2013.
135  See Chapter 2 for further information on deployed command and control.
136  J1-J9 are recognised military branches.  J3 – operations.
Section 1 – Reception, staging, onward movement 
and integration process
Chapter 7 – Reception, 
staging, onward movement 
and integration
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)142
Conducting reception, staging and onward movement in a 
multinational context
7.3. Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.13, Deployment of Forces provides the NATO 
context of multinational deployment.  AJP-3.13 focuses on command and control 
which needs to be separately agreed for each operation.  Commanders’ and RSOM 
staffs’ ability to adapt the arrangements outlined in AJP-3.13 to fit the operational 
circumstances is key to deploying successfully.
7.4. The Force Commander is responsible for planning and executing RSOM, through 
the appointed RSOM headquarters.  The RSOM plan should be coordinated between 
the troop contributing nations and the RSOM headquarters.137
7.5. The RSOM commander must have sufficient control of the national 
RSOM-enabling forces deployed in the joint operations area to maintain unity of 
137  AJP-3.13, Deployment of Forces, paragraph 0203.
Legend
APOD Air port of disembarkation
FLS Forward logistic site
RPOD Rail port of disembarkation
SPOD Sea port of disembarkation
SPOD
APOD
Marshalling 
area
Staging 
area
Operational 
deployment 
area
Integration achieved
Units form up
RPOD
FLS
Maritime 
Unit
Reception
Staging
Integration
Onward movement
Figure 7.1 – Reception, staging, onward movement and integration process 
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 143
command and unity of effort.  The RSOM headquarters should be assigned logistic 
control of all national support elements (as a minimum).
7.6. Unity of command and unity of effort specify that the RSOM commander has 
command and control over the entire RSOM operation (from ports of disembarkation 
until arrival at final unit destination).  This implies that the RSOM commander 
must have the authority and assets to: direct; protect; support; and sustain forces 
throughout RSOM.
7.7. To support and sustain units during the RSOM process, the RSOM headquarters 
has command and control over theatre RSOM-enabling assets which are assigned in 
the Combined Joint Statement of Requirement.  In addition, the RSOM headquarters 
has authority over:
• RSOM-enabling activities in the joint operations area;
• logistic units/agencies supporting the RSOM operation;
• all host-nation support issues relating to RSOM;
• contracting for RSOM;
• real estate management of RSOM infrastructure; and
• coordinating RSOM force protection issues.
Any RSOM functions not carried out multinationally at the theatre level are to be 
provided by nations through their national support elements.138
7.8. In cases where the RSOM headquarters is the first, or only, joint headquarters 
in theatre, the command and control structure must be defined during the planning 
process, before deployment.  In particular, the RSOM headquarters must have tactical 
control over units in RSOM.  The headquarters maintains situational awareness at 
the operational level while, at the same time, executing the RSOM operation at the 
tactical level.
7.9. Movements communication information systems.  Where RSOM is being 
carrie
d out multinationally, we require access to the relevant multinational or NATO 
movements communication and information systems.  We must be able to exchange 
compatible data with relevant allied headquarters to support full RSOM visibility 
across the joint operations area. 
7.10. Liaison.  Exchanging liaison officers (or liaison detachments) between 
R
SOM headquarters, host-nation authorities, international organisations and 
non-governmental organisations is essential to a successful RSOM operation.  All 
138  See Chapter 2 for further detail on national support elements.
“
The RSOM 
commander 
must have 
the authority 
and assets to: 
direct; protect; 
support; and 
sustain forces 
throughout 
RSOM.
”
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)144
formations/units and national support elements should liaise directly with the RSOM 
enabling units, including:
• sea port of disembarkation operations units;
• personnel reception units; and
• situational awareness operations units. 
Reception, staging and onward movement for UK deployments
7.1 1. In UK operations, RSOM is usually coordinated by logistic staff in the deployed 
logistic command and control node, on behalf of the Joint Commander.  Logistic 
staff are responsible for the full range of activities involved in the RSOM process, as 
directed by the Joint Task Force Headquarters.  To make sure the RSOM procedure is 
efficient and effective, J4139 staff should be involved in reconnaissance and planning 
at the earliest feasible stage of the planning process.
7.12 . Operational requirements.  The deployed logistic command and control node 
mus
t balance the competing demands of RSOM and, as the deployment progresses, 
of increasing force sustainment.  Those demands may require an initial surge in 
logistic capability.  
Reception
7.13. Reception is the process of: receivin g; offloading; marshalling; recording; and 
transporting personnel and materiel through sea, air or rail ports of disembarkation.  
Reception is focused on land force elements and those maritime and air force 
elements that do not self-deploy.  Reception involves:
• preparing facilities;
• initial force protection;
• administering and briefing personnel; and subsequently,
• transporting them away from the port of disembarkation.  
7.14. In a large joint operations area (where components are often widely separated) 
reception may offer a significant challenge.  The process can also involve 
time-consuming preliminary activities which need to be completed before the main 
force deploys, such as building:
• camps or temporary holding facilities;
• medical facilities;
• theatre reception and redeployment centres; and
139  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J4 – logistics.
”
“
The deployed 
logistic command 
and control node 
must balance 
the competing 
demands 
of RSOM 
and, as the 
deployment 
progresses, of 
increasing force 
sustainment.  
Those demands 
may require 
an initial surge 
in logistic 
capability.
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 145
• logistic compounds.
7.15. Deployed joint logistic command and control node.  The joint logistic command 
and c
ontrol node must be deployed early enough to support reception activity.  The 
command and control node should already have administrative and logistic systems 
in place, such as:
• logistic information systems;
• Defence Support Chain processes (including the reverse supply chain);
• personnel and materiel tracking; and 
• aeromedical evacuation.140 
7.16 . Key elements.  Key elements of reception are as follows.
a. 
Activating ports of disembarkation for air, sea or rail.  The overall quantity 
and different types of ports of disembarkation influence the complexity of 
reception activities, so activities should be synchronised at, and between, each 
port of disembarkation.
b. Reception starts at the point that depl oying forces and materiel arrive into a 
port of disembarkation.
c. Reception activities continue until the point from which forces and materiel 
are moved onward into the deployed operational area.  This may be via a 
staging area. 
d. Once the deployment has begun, the flow of incoming personnel and 
materiel should be smooth and continuous to avoid causing a backlog of 
subsequent arrivals in the reception stage.
140  Including the Patient Evacuation Coordination Cell established within Joint Task Force 
Headquarters J3.
“
The joint 
logistic 
command 
and control 
node must 
be deployed 
early enough 
to support 
reception 
activity.
”
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)146
Staging
7.17. Staging is the process of assembling, temporarily holding and organising 
personnel and materiel arriving in theatre, before their onward movement and 
further activities.  Staging may involve both formed units and individuals.  It is a 
life-support function that, at its simplest, feeds and accommodates personnel arriving 
in theatre.
7.18. Staging can be a significant management task with forces flowing into ports 
of disembarkation from several locations, possibly requiring long periods in staging 
areas.  However, staging is not always required.  Force elements could be moved 
straight to their operational deployment location.  The staging requirement depends 
on:
• the size of the force;
• the need for integration;
• the speed of deployment; and
• what real estate is available.
Staging can include:
• recording personnel arriving in theatre;
• providing life support while troop le vels build up, troops are organised, 
reconfigured, acclimatised and trained and their equipment fitted with 
urgent operational requirements;
• holding reinforcements un til they are required; and
• carefully sequencing integration activi ty to produce the required flow of 
forces into the area of operations.
Onward movement
7.19. Onward movement is the process of relocating units, personnel and materiel 
from the reception or staging areas to their operational deployment location.  
Onward movement may be to any of the components (including vessels at sea) and 
may use military, host-nation support or locally hired transport assets.  Onward 
movement requires J2141 and J3 support if it is not taking place in a benign 
environment.
141  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J2 – intelligence.
”
“
Onward 
movement may 
be to any of 
the components 
(including 
vessels at sea) 
and may use 
military, host-
nation support 
or locally hired 
transport 
assets.
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 147
7.20. Onward movement requires the following.
a. Coordinated movement control.  Joint movements staff need to be fully 
a
ware of the operational situation across all components, to ensure that 
personnel and materiel are transported to where they are needed, when they 
are needed.  Logistic information systems underpin that operational awareness.
b. Effective transport network.   Onward movement should use protected 
rout
es.  In the land environment this may include establishing convoy support 
centres.  Logistic and medical support must be available (with force protection) 
and may need to be self-generated from within logistic units.
Integration
7.21. Integration is the coordinated process of transferring operationally ready units 
(and contracted capabilities) into the joint force.  Integration receives personnel into 
units and orientates them to the operational area.  It includes acclimatisation, training 
and situational awareness.  This process is J3-led and conducted within components.  
During integration, the deployed logistic command and control node becomes the 
supporting headquarters.
7.22. The Joint Task Force Commander is responsible for directing integration activity.  
The deployed logistic headquarters’ responsibilities are limited to integrating its own 
forces and enabling elements of integration training for the whole force.  Examples 
of such enabling activity include providing ranges in reception and staging areas 
and presenting some theatre orientation briefings.  In multinational operations, 
integrating our forces into an alliance or coalition framework involves additional 
activity, for example, detaching liaison officers to assist with coordination across 
nations.  
7.23. Integration may be conducted outside the area of operations, or at any stage of 
the RSOI process.  The larger the force, or the greater the number of nations involved, 
the more demanding it is to achieve.  Integration is complete when the commander 
assesses the joint force to be effective.
“
Integration is 
J3-led and 
conducted 
within 
components.  
During 
integration, 
the deployed 
logistic 
command and 
control node 
becomes the 
supporting 
headquarters.
”
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)148
Command, control and coordination
7. 24. Reception, staging and onward movement headquarters.  Coordinating RSOM 
for all but the smalles
t operations requires a bespoke joint tactical level staff with the 
necessary expertise and resources to carry out the function.  The deployed logistic 
headquarters normally performs this task.  Establishing a headquarters to command 
the RSOM process:
• provides continuity from the earl y planning stages of an operation;
• develops relationships between the RSOM commander and the other 
component commanders and allies; and
• avoids the need to create ad hoc headquarters.
7. 25. Reception, staging and onward movement reconnaissance group.  The RSOM 
re
connaissance group must assess a number of issues before the RSOM process can 
commence.
a. The prevailing tactical situation.
b. The need for national contingents to cooperate and de-conflict their 
activity.  Where RSOM is being conducted within a multinational operation, 
there should, ideally, be a combined multinational reconnaissance group.
c. The location, capacity and suitability of available ports of disembarkation.  
The reconnaissance group must assess available infrastructure to make sure it 
meets the operational requirement.  The assessment must include comparing 
the infrastructure to the size of the deploying force and the throughput that 
planned deployment timelines require at the ports of disembarkation.
d. The real estate suitability and support infrastructure availability, particularly 
the capacity, diversity and accessibility of the local transport network.  These 
must be assessed to make sure they are capable of meeting the reception, 
staging and onward movement activity requirements, including administrative.  
Staff should consider wider real estate requirements for activities such as range 
work for deployed weapon systems and driver training.
Section 2 – Reception, staging and 
onward movement capabilities
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 149
e. Access to life support services such as electrical power, compatible 
equipment, communications, fuel, water, food and waste disposal.  If these 
services are assessed as inadequate, the need to deploy more resources may 
delay the RSOM process.
7. 26 . Reception, staging and onward movement activation group.  The RSOM 
ac
tivation group is tailored to match the requirements of the RSOM process.  The size 
of the group and the trade skills it requires depend on the:
• number and locations of ports of disembarkation;
• in-place logistic infrastructure (including the transportation network); and
• composition and size of the force to be deployed.
7. 27. Enabling capabilities.  The deployed logistic headquarters exercises command 
and c
ontrol over a wide range of specialist enabling assets which support RSOM and 
which may cover functions including:
• engineering;
• infrastructure;
• labour support;
• supply;
• transport;
• medical;
• provost;
• administration; and
• J8/J9.142
Such assets may be permanently assigned to the headquarters, for ongoing activities 
supporting the force, or be allocated for specific phases of an operation.  It is essential 
that RSOM enabling assets feature early in the joint desired order of arrival.  If 
RSOM facilities, particularly ports of disembarkation, are geographically dislocated, 
additional command and control structures (such as joint logistic units) could be 
formed around suitable component organisations to aid cohesion. 
Conducting reception, staging and onward movement
7. 28 . Operational environment.  How RSOM is conducted depends largely on the 
op
erational circumstances, particularly at the point of entry.  A secured area in the 
joint operations area enables a more rapid build up of combat power than in an 
operation launched from a more remote forward mounting base. 
142  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J8 – resource management; J9 – civil-military 
cooperation.
“
RSOM-enabling 
assets may be 
permanently 
assigned to the 
headquarters 
or be allocated 
for specific 
phases of an 
operation.  It is 
essential that 
RSOM enabling 
assets feature 
early in the 
joint desired 
order of arrival.
”
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)150
7. 29. Movement within the joint operations area.  Coordination and planning is 
re
quired to best use scarce transport resources for RSOM, both nationally and with 
other deployed nations.  Routes must be carefully planned and their use controlled, 
including liaison with the civil authorities and with other nations, to ensure freedom 
of movement and to de-conflict military and civilian use.  An essential element of the 
RSOM process is to make sure transport supporting infrastructure is in place.  
a. Movement within the joint operations area depends mainly on the:
• capacity and condition of the local road and rail networks;
• availability of road and rail transport assets; and
• associated force protection requirements.
Routes and capabilities may be limited, particularly in difficult environmental 
conditions, and engineer operations to improve the situation may take time 
to complete.  Road and rail capacity face their greatest demand as the force 
deploys.  That demand may reach its peak before the full complement of 
enabling equipment has been discharged from its strategic transport (such as 
shipping).  
b. Tactical air transport and aviation assets provide valuable support to 
the RSOM transport plan, particularly while ground routes are established or 
restored.  However, in all but the smallest scale operations, their relative capacity 
and cost prevent them providing a lead role.  Air and aviation transport also 
have infrastructure requirements, focused on their airfields and landing areas.  
c. Planners should also investigate options to enhance RSOM transport by 
using sea routes or inland waterways (which may also have infrastructure 
implications, at their nodes and along their routes).  
7. 30. Transfer of authority.  Transfer of authority for force elements from respective 
Ser
vice commands to the Joint Task Force Commander is a key element of the 
RSOM process.  Nationally, transfer of authority normally takes place for land forces 
once emplaned or embarked and, for maritime and air forces, on arrival in the joint 
operations area.  However, it is essential that the deployed logistic headquarters, 
acting with authority delegated from the Joint Task Force Commander, has sufficient 
authority over force elements to manage the RSOM process as a fully joint operation.  
For NATO operations, transfer of authority to the Joint Task Force Commander will 
take place at embarkation.  For other multinational operations, the timing of transfer 
of authority to a non-UK Joint Task Force Commander will be determined by the MOD 
and communicated through PJHQ and the Joint Commander.
”
“
For NATO 
operations, 
transfer of 
authority 
to the Joint 
Task Force 
Commander 
will take place 
for land forces 
at embarkation.
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
7
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 151
Key points 
• Reception, staging, onward movement and integration (RSOI) describes the series of 
activities that enable force elements arriving in theatre to reach full operating capability 
in the joint force.
• Though usually coordinated by the Joint Logistic Support Group in a multinational 
context, RSOI remains an individual national responsibility unless specifically directed 
otherwise.
• During the reception, staging and onward  movement (RSOM) phases, the deployed 
joint logistic headquarters (or the Joint Logistic Support Group), as the RSOM 
headquarters, is the supported headquarters.  The integration process is J3-led.
• To make sure RSOM is effective, deployed joint logistic headquarters staff should be 
involved early in planning the operation.
• The RSOM commander must have sufficient control of RSOM-enabling forces to 
maintain unity of command and unity of effort.
• When involved in multinational RSOM, we require access to multinational movements 
communications and information systems.
• An initial surge in logistic capability ma y be required to meet the competing demands 
of RSOM and increasing force sustainment.
• Reception is the process of: receiving; of floading;  marshalling;  recording; and  
transporting personnel and materiel arriving in theatre through sea, air or rail ports of 
disembarkation.
• Staging is a life-support function that essentially feeds and accommodates personnel 
arriving in theatre, before their onward movement and further activities.  Staging is not 
always required.
• Onward movement relocates units, personnel and materiel from the reception or 
staging areas to their operational deployment location.  It requires J2 and J3 support in 
non-benign environments.
• Integration is the coordinated process of transferring operationally ready units (and 
contracted capabilities) into the joint force.  The deployed logistic headquarters 
becomes the supporting headquarters.
• RSOM requires the following capabilities : RSOM headquarters; RSOM reconnaissance 
group; RSOM activation group; and specialist enabling assets.
• The conduct of RSOM depends on three key elements: the conditions in the operational 
environment; movement within the joint operations area; and transfer of authority.
Reception, staging, onward movement and integration

[Page 162: No extractable text]

Sustain
Chapter 8 discusses the method by which we sustain the 
deployed force, whether in a national or multinational 
operation.  In five sections it considers:
• logistic sustainment planning;
• in-theatre supply;
• the Defence Support Chain in logistic sustainment;
• the importance of understanding the risk to 
  sustainability; and
• the reverse supply chain.
Chapter 8
153
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
Section 1 – Logistic sustainment planning  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 155
Section 2 – In-theatre supply.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 157
Section 3 – Defence Support Chain   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 158
Section 4 – Risk  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 160
Section 5 – Reverse supply chain  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 160
Annex 8A – 4Ds aide memoire .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 163

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)154
Throughout the struggle, it was in his logistic 
inability to maintain his armies in the field that 
the enemy’s fatal weakness lay.  Courage his 
forces had in full measure, but courage was 
not enough.  Reinforcements failed to arrive, 
weapons, ammunition and food alike ran short, 
and the dearth of fuel caused their powers of 
tactical mobility to dwindle to the vanishing 
point.  In the last stages of the campaign they 
could do little more than wait for the Allied 
advance to sweep over them.
General Dwight D. Eisenhower”
“
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 155
8.1. Logistic sustainment planning focuse s on identifying the logistic requirement 
that ensures sustainability of the deployed force. 
a. Sustainability is defined as: the ability of a force to maintain the necessary 
level of combat power for the duration required to achieve its objectives.143   
b. Logistic sustainment is defined as: the process and mechanism by 
which sustainability is achieved and which consists of supplying a force with 
consumables, and replacing combat losses and non-combat attrition of 
equipment in order to maintain the force’s combat power for the duration 
required to meet its objectives.144 
8.2. Logistic information services.  Logistic information services (infrastructure 
and da
ta) should be provided to support every element of logistic sustainment.  
Correctly establishing those is vital to maintaining our full visibility of stocks and 
locations and generates confidence in the logistic sustainment process.  This may 
require information to be exchanged across several information systems (national 
and multinational).  Effective situational awareness enables collaborative working 
between deployed nations, for example, to merge multinational supply chains and 
reallocate stocks.  Such collaboration, together with confidence in theatre logistic 
sustainment, helps reduce the deployed logistic footprint and pressure on the 
Defence Support Chain.  Achieving that logistic confidence and situational awareness 
across the national or multinational force depends on identifying, planning and 
implementing both the information exchange requirement and the information 
systems from the earliest stages of the logistic estimate.
Sustainability statement
8.3. The Chief of the Defence Staff’s Directive contains a sustainability statement 
(SUSTAT) that is based on factors identified from the military strategic estimate.  The 
SUSTAT confirms the overall logistic requirement and provides authority to commit 
143  Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-06, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions.
144  Ibid.
Section 1 – Logistic sustainment planning
Chapter 8 – Sustain
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)156
and release finance and materiel.  It articulates our anticipated demand, as predicted 
by analysis in the political-military estimate and military-strategic estimate processes. 
8.4. Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) 145 develops the SUSTAT and remains the 
ultimate authority for any amendments and revisions (although Service commands 
can, and should, propose these through PJHQ J4).  PJHQ modifies SUSTATs in response 
to experience as the campaign progresses.  Individual operations or phases within the 
campaign may also require their own SUSTAT.  This may include our need to sustain 
multinational partners as part of a pre-agreed memorandum of understanding or in 
response to the overarching logistic principle of collective responsibility.  Annex 4B 
provides a generic example of a SUSTAT.
8.5. SUSTATs are developed using the ‘4 Ds’ (see Figure 8.1):
• distance;
• destination;
• demand; and
• duration.
Annex 8A details planning considerations underpinning the 4Ds. 
Figure 8.1 – The ‘4 Ds’ 
145  Or Navy Command, for the Response Force Task Group.
Distance
Destination
DurationDemand
Sustainment
requirement
Determines the
necessary robustness 
and need for investment 
in the support requirement
Determines the length of 
lines of communication
Determines the nature of 
the requirement
Determines the 
magnitude of the 
requirement
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 157
8.6. Supply areas.  The size and complexity of the operation dictates the type of 
s
upply area we need to receive, store and distribute stocks and materiel.  The three 
most likely forms are as follows.146 
• NATO/multinational operations – the joint logistic support area which is 
c
ontrolled by the Joint Logistic Support Group and includes national support 
elements.147
• Bi-lateral operations – the combined joint support area which is controlled 
b
y the Combined Joint Support Group, with national support elements 
minimised by integrating them into the Combined Joint Support Group.
• National operations – the joint supply area which is controlled by the 
deplo
yed joint logistic command and control node or headquarters.
8.7 . Sources of in-theatre support.  We maintain sustainability through a 
c
ombination of support from the strategic base, via the Coupling Bridge, and 
in-theatre supply.  By supplying some of the logistic requirement from within theatre, 
the deployed logistic footprint and Defence Support Chain throughput are reduced.  
There are a number of in-theatre sources.
a. Host-nation support.  Host-nation support is defined as: civil and milit ary 
assistance rendered in peace, crisis or war by a host nation to NATO and/or other 
forces and NATO organizations that are located on, operating on/from, or in 
transit through the host nation’s territory.148  Fuel and infrastructure resources 
are typical examples of the support offered.
b. In-country resources.  In-country resources are similar to host-nation 
s
upport but are confined to logistic sustainment that is obtained commercially 
from contractors within the joint operations area.  In-country resources 
are defined as: resources provided to a force from the non-governmental 
infrastructure of a country.149  This may include indigenous sources as well 
as contractors deployed by other nations.  When awarding and overseeing 
contracts, we need to take safeguard measures to check that those local 
146  See Chapters 2 and 3 for more detail on the supply areas.
147  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.6, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Joint Logistic Support Group .
148  Op. Cit., AAP-06.
149  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, United Kingdom Supplement to the NATO Terminology 
Database.
Section 2 – In-theatre supply
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)158
contractors are sufficiently credible and capable for us to be certain that we are 
not inadvertently funding insurgency.150 
c. Contractor support to operations.  Contractor support to operations is 
describ
ed in Chapter 5, Section 2.  In multinational operations, contracts can also 
be established as an Allied contract through the NATO Support Agency. 
8.8. Other support chains.  We may rely on contractors, other government 
depar
tments, international organisations or non-governmental organisations for 
certain capabilities or equipment types to support the deployment.  Those other 
organisations may have their own support chains and, depending on the type of 
arrangement, Defence may not have access to those organisations’ support chain 
information.  Our logistic staff must therefore engage with the organisations to 
understand their logistic sustainment levels and report any key areas of risk151 (for 
example, whether there are sufficient spares in theatre for the equipment types under 
contract).  We cannot maintain logistic situational awareness without visibility of this 
part of the deployed force or the support chains on which they, and the force, depend. 
8.9. Support from the strategic base.  Deployed logistic elements within the joint 
op
erations area (or those alternative sources listed above) may not be able to meet 
our logistic sustainment requirements.  Individual units (or their supporting logistic 
elements) would therefore raise demands for materiel from the strategic base.  Defence 
Equipment and Support (DE&S) Logistic Commodities and Services and Operating 
Centre project teams then arrange the supply of items that are available from within 
the military inventory.  The project teams liaise with industry for those items that are 
not immediately available or which are provided under contractor logistic support 
arrangements.  In both cases, once logistic sustainment items are available, they are 
processed through the appropriate strategic base supply system and despatched via 
the Purple Gate for in-theatre delivery across the Coupling Bridge.152
8.10. Sustainment Movement Plan.  The Detailed Deployment Plan153 is used to allocate 
strategic movement assets to deploy all personnel and materiel as set out in the joint 
desired order of arrival.  For logistic sustainment purposes, PJHQ tasks Defence Support 
150  JDP 3-40, Security and Stabilisation: The Military Contribution ; expected to be replaced by JDP 05, 
Shaping a Stable World during 2015.
151  See Section 4 for further information on risk.
152  Both the Purple Gate and the Coupling Bridge are described in Chapter 6, Section 4.
153  The detailed deployment plan is covered in Chapter 6, Section 2.
Section 3 – Defence Support Chain
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 159
Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM) to formulate a sustainment movement 
plan, to be implemented when the deployment phase is complete.  The Sustainment 
Movement Plan acts as a timetable (with regular scheduled departures and arrivals) 
and includes both air and surface movement means.  
8.1 1. Managing the Sustainment Movement Plan.  DSCOM Movement Operations 
ne
gotiates for, and arranges, military and charter assets to move the logistic 
sustainment stocks planned in the SUSTAT as well as further stocks demanded 
from theatre.  DSCOM also recommends changes to movement schedules to use all 
available lines of communication efficiently, while still meeting theatre requirements.  
When operational priorities change at short notice, the theatre-lead uses the theatre 
priority list process to ask for DE&S support to deliver the new critical requirements 
earlier.  DSCOM issues a daily situation report which summarises planned movement 
of critical items.
8.12. Moving logistic sustainment materiel.  DE&S is responsible for ensuring materiel 
i
s moved effectively from depots to ports of embarkation within the strategic base.  
PJHQ makes sure the Commander has adequate resources to move materiel from 
ports of disembarkation to its final destination in the joint operations area.  DSCOM 
establishes alternative movement means for any force elements operating in the 
joint operations area which are not easily served by standing lines of communication 
(for example, by using standing commercial contracts to support maritime force 
elements).
8.13. Standard priority system.  Once the Defence Support Chain is established into 
the join
t operations area, the standard priority system (SPS) is used to prioritise 
materiel flow.  When applying the SPS, priorities are assigned to make sure those 
items that are needed most urgently move ahead of less urgent items.  Details of 
the SPS are set out as constraints, standards and rules within the Defence Logistic 
Framework.154  The SPS provides the mechanism for processing demands, and for 
handling and moving materiel, to meet the needs of those that the Defence Support 
Chain supports.  The SPS is a four-tier system of:
• immediate;
• priority;
• routine; and
• forward planning.
It is applicable to both the forward support and reverse supply chains.
154  The details of the standard priority system are included in Joint Service Publication (JSP) 886, The 
Defence Logistics Support Chain Manual , which will be subsumed by the Defence Logistic Framework during 
2015.
“
When 
operational 
priorities change 
at short notice, 
the theatre-
lead uses the 
theatre priority 
list process 
to ask for 
DE&S support 
to deliver the 
new critical 
requirements 
earlier.
”
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)160
8.14. The Joint Task Force Headquarters J1/J4 staff are required to inform the 
Commander of any areas of sustainability risk to the deployed force, or to specific 
planned operations.  We should understand that risk provides crucial operational 
value if appropriately and accurately recorded, reported and acted on through the 
chain of command.
8.15. Risk management policy is set by Joint Service Publication (JSP) 892, Risk 
Management.  The policy directs that a risk management process should be used to 
make sure that risks are:
• identified;
• assessed;
• controlled; and
• raised up the chain of command for mitigating action or for information.
To capture sustainability risks accurately and inform the Commander’s logistic 
sustainment decisions, J1/J4155 staff need to draw the following from logistic 
information systems, for deployed contractors and for the military:
• in-theatre stock levels;
• future requirements; and
• Defence Support Chain delivery assurance levels.
155  J1-J9 are recognised military staff branches.  J1 – personnel; J4 – logistics.
Section 4 – Risk
Section 5 – Reverse supply chain
8.16. When sustaining the force, the reve rse supply chain is as important as the 
forward support chain.  Unserviceable and surplus items building up in the joint 
operations area create an unnecessary burden on facilities and stock managers, waste 
limited MOD resources and may often be in breach of contract (where MOD has an 
agreement to return items to industry for repair).  We must dispose of those items 
locally or return them to the UK via the reverse supply chain taking into account the 
implications of discrete reverse supply chains that exist within contracted support 
arrangements.  Correct procedures for operating the reverse supply chain are detailed 
as constraints, rules and standards within the Defence Logistic Framework. 
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 161
8.17. Logistic staff in the joint operations ar ea identify surplus items and seek disposal 
instructions from DE&S project teams.  Project teams also request that specific items 
(or ranges of items) are returned from the joint operations area when they are no 
longer serviceable.  Such activity is essential to manage and assist contractor logistic 
support effectively, particularly when ‘contracting for availability’ and ‘contracting 
for capability’.  Returning items are given a movement priority to meet project teams’ 
requirements.  
8.18. DSCOM amalgamates all items into a single DE&S theatre return priority list, 
with occasional guidance from the Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic 
Operations) and PJHQ.  DSCOM negotiates for extra movement resources if there 
are not enough assets moving materiel to the joint operations area to satisfy reverse 
supply chain demand.  Using the reverse supply chain contributes to minimising the 
deployed logistic footprint and assists in preparing the force for redeployment.
Key points 
• Sustainability is defined as: the ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of 
combat power for the duration required to achieve its objectives.
• Logistic sustainment is defined as: the process and mechanism by which 
sustainability is achieved and which consists of supplying a force with consumables, 
and replacing combat losses and non-combat attrition of equipment in order to 
maintain the force’s combat power for the duration required to meet its objectives.
• Developed and controlled by PJHQ, the su stainability statement (SUSTAT) confirms 
the overall logistic requirement and provides authority to commit and release 
finance and materiel.
• The ‘4Ds’ – demand, destination, distance and duration – are key determinants of the 
logistic sustainment requirement.
• Logistic sustainment is maintained th rough a combination of support from the 
strategic base, via the Coupling Bridge, and in-theatre supply.
• Using in-theatre supply helps reduce th e logistic footprint and Defence Support 
Chain throughput.  Sources include: host-nation support; in-country resources; and 
contractor support to operations.
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)162
Key points (continued)
• We may rely on contractors for certain capabilities/equipment types to sustain a 
deployment.  Many contractors have their own supply chains.  Unless logistic staff 
engage with contractors to understand those supply chains, we cannot maintain 
logistic situational awareness across the force.
• Managed by Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements, the Sustainment 
Movement Plan replaces the Detailed Deployment Plan when the deployment phase 
is complete.  It allocates strategic movement assets to move stocks planned in the 
SUSTAT as well as extra stocks demanded from theatre, into the joint operations area.
• We should understand that risk provides cr ucial operational value if appropriately and 
accurately recorded, reported and acted on through the chain of command.
• The reverse supply chain is as important as the forward support chain.  Returning 
unserviceable and surplus items reduces the logistic footprint and helps prepare the 
force for redeployment.
• Every element of sustaining the deployed force is underpinned and enabled by 
the logistic information system infrastructure and high quality data.  Established 
effectively and early, it provides a high level of confidence in theatre logistic 
sustainment and enables logistic collaboration.  These, combined with assured 
delivery by the Defence Support Chain, enable the Commander to operate with a 
reduced logistic footprint and relieve pressure on the Coupling Bridge.
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 163
Annex 8A – 4Ds aide memoire
4D Description Planning considerations
Distance The distance from the strategic base to the 
joint operations ar
ea dictates the length of 
strategic lines of communication.  Distances 
between the ports of disembarkation, the joint supply area and component areas of operation dictate the length of other lines of communication within the joint operations area.
The nature of lines of communication may be described in terms of:
• transit time;
• distance;• capacity; and• topography.
These determine the:
• size;• shape;• structure; and• balance
of required logistic resources.  
When considering the lines of communication, we should also refl ect what the 
medical cold-chain and the reverse supply chain require.
The operating stock requirement is determined by the volume of resources we require 
to sustain the operation and those additional resources that must be held to cover the likely resupply times.
We may require a forward mounting base or intermediate staging bases.
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)164
4D Description Planning considerations
Destination The destination of an operation 
det
ermines the nature of the sustainment 
requirement.  The environment (for 
example, climate and topography) has a significant impact on the logistic support the deployed force needs. 
a. Operating conditions influence the pattern of equipment attrition and the physiological demands on personnel.
b. The extent the deployed force is dispersed influences how the logistic support 
elements should be composed to sustain the force.
c. The destination helps to define the strategic lines of communication based on 
knowledge of resources available in the joint operations area or nearby.
d. Factors which influence deductions made when considering the other ‘Ds’ 
include:
• language;
• culture;• level of available infrastructure;• likely attitudes of host-nation authorities; and• availability of in-country resources.
For example, when balancing a mixture of logistic support options:
• contractor;• multinational;• coalition; or• host-nation support.
Sustain

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
8A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 165
4D Description Planning considerations
Demand The demand for logistic support (with 
dura
tion, below) determines the scale of 
the sustainment requirement.  Demand 
depends on the mix of the supported force and the rate of consumption.  However, demand is also influenced by the likely intensity and duration of the operation and the distance from the strategic base.  Rate of consumption changes as operational circumstances dictate and is based on a combination of:
• the steady-state requirement;
• cyclical variations; and• periodic surges in demand.
a. Steady state.  Steady state demand reflects the daily maintenance needs that 
are unlik
ely to vary much, such as the consumption of rations or the routine use of 
services.  We can determine steady state demand fairly easily and accurately from 
historical records; it is the easiest element of demand to pre-plan.
b. Cyclical.  Cyclical demand is additional demand caused by predictable events 
s
uch as training activities or seasonal conditions.  Cyclical demand varies between 
resources and services depending on the nature of the activity.
c. Surge.  Surge demand represents the greatest logistic challenge because 
it i
s the most difficult to predict and the most likely to vary (for example, 
because of our response to an opponent’s activity or when we seize operational 
opportunities).  There are peaks as well as troughs and rates of demand often change with little warning time.  Our planning should anticipate the possibility 
of surge demand that stretches the logistic organisation.  We should put in place a highly responsive system with access to immediate reserves, rapid delivery means and the ability to switch priorities quickly.  Surge demand cannot be met 
indefinitely.
Duration The duration of an operation (with 
demand, above) determines the scale of the sustainment requirement.  It also, indirectly, dictates the resilience needed by the logistic support infrastructure. 
a. For prolonged operations, we should make adequate provision for roulement of force elements (personnel and equipment).
b. The force commander needs to assess the balance of operational risk in 
conducting an operation with limited logistic resources and support against a more fully resourced operation (but which would therefore take longer to reach 
initial operating capability).
Sustain

[Page 176: No extractable text]

Restoring combat 
power
Chapter 9 outlines three of the four activities that form the 
process of restoring combat power:
• rehabilitation;
• redeployment; and
• recuperation.
The fourth, transition, is not covered as it involves minimal 
joint logistics.
Chapter 9
167
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
Section 1 – Restoring combat power.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 169
Section 2 – Rehabilitation.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 172
Section 3 – Redeployment  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 174
Section 4 – Recuperation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 187
Annex 9A – Redeployment process.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 189
Annex 9B – Redeployment phases – logistic 
                       considerations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 190
Annex 9C – Redeployment planning considerations .  .  .  . 191

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)168
My congratulations are due to the teams of personnel, 
military, civilian and contracted, who have worked 
over the past months to ensure that one of the largest 
military operations of the past decades has been so 
professionally discharged.  Having set the plan in train in 
2010 that all combat forces would be out of the country 
by 2015 the Prime Minister fixed the end state, and 
whilst we have revisited the profile of drawdown many 
times, that you accomplished the aim ahead of time within 
the challenging budget agreed with the Treasury, is a 
tremendous achievement.
Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, 
17 April 2015
”
“
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 169
9.1. Restoring combat power is the overall process that returns units to operational 
readiness for current or future operations.  The UK uses the following terms to 
describe and distinguish the activities involved in restoring combat power.156 
a. Rehabilitation.  Rehabilitating force element s during the course of 
operations enables them to resume combat within the joint operations area.  
Rehabilitation is defined as: the processing, usually in theatre in a relatively 
quiet area, of units, individuals and equipment recently withdrawn from combat 
operations, to prepare them for further combat operations.157  The processing 
involves:
• resting units and personnel;
• restoring equipment and personnel to operational fitness;
• issuing replacement personnel, supplies and equipment;
• undertaking training; and
• generally being made ready for re-employment in combat operations.
b. Redeployment.  Redeploying force elements from the joint operations area 
(
usually to the strategic base, but it could be via, or to, another joint operations 
area) is normally separate from their recuperation but is often a precursor to 
doing so.  Redeployment is defined as: the process of preparing and executing 
the relocation of units and materiel to a new destination.  This may be to a 
new deployment area or to peacetime locations where recuperation will take 
place.158
156  NATO is currently developing Allied redeployment doctrine.  The Bi-Strategic Commands’ Joint 
Operational Guidance 14/01, Redeployment (November 2014) will be reflected in Allied Joint Publication 
(AJP)-3.13, Allied Doctrine for the Deployment of Forces  when AJP-3.13 is re-written during 2016.
157  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database.
158  Ibid.
Section 1 – Restoring combat power
Chapter 9 – Restoring 
combat power 
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)170
c. Recuperation.  Following operations, force elemen ts undergo a process 
of recuperation to re-establish their ‘steady-state’ level of readiness to 
resume other activities (such as training) within the operational planning 
cycle.  Recuperation is defined as: the replacement of resources, including 
personnel and materiel, following operational activity in preparation for further 
operations.  It includes the training necessary to restore force elements to their 
normal readiness level (Rx).159  Recuperation usually takes place in the strategic 
base as part of the operational planning cycle.
d. Recovery.  Recovery is the general term used in the context of the force 
genera
tion cycle to embrace the defined processes of:
• rehabilitation;
• redeployment; and
• recuperation.
e. Transition.  Transition is the process of restructuring forces during an 
op
eration so they are more able to meet changing operational requirements 
(for example, transition within a campaign from warfighting to stabilisation).  
Transition is not covered in this Joint Doctrine Publication.160
9.2. Planning.  Planning for restoring combat power must take place concurrently 
with deplo
yment planning.  Figure 9.1 illustrates the place the three elements of 
recovery have in the operational planning cycle.
159  Ibid.
160  Transition is discussed in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of 
Operations.
Restoring combat power
“
”
Planning for 
restoring combat 
power must 
take place 
concurrently 
with deployment 
planning.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 171
Legend
FE@Rx Force elements at readiness (x = level of readiness)
R0 Ready to deploy
RIT Readiness in-theatre
Logistic sustainment
Recuperation
Logistic support to force generation
RIT R0
Generate 
FE@Rx
Maintain 
FE@Rx
Training
Prepare
Deploy
In-
theatre 
training
Conduct 
operations/
rehabilitation
Recuperation
Redeployment
Figure 9.1 – Operational planning cycle: recovery
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)172
9.3. Rehabilitation provides flexibility to prepare a deployed force either for:
• continued operations in the current theatre;
• redeployment directly to a concurrent, consecutive or subsequent operation 
(for example, equipment and force elements redeployed directly from 
Operation TELIC to Operation HERRICK); or
• redeployment to the strategic base to recuperate for future operations.
Rehabilitation requires planning, including giving sufficient notice to the Defence 
Support Chain to ensure the required capabilities and supplies are in the joint 
operations area. 
9.4. The following paragraphs describe what can be achieved by rehabilitation in an 
austere setting.  Not every rehabilitation scenario includes all elements.  For example, 
a limited rehabilitation could take place in a forward mounting base only to prepare 
supplies and equipment for redeployment to the strategic base.  Rehabilitation 
follows the rehabilitating unit’s disengagement from combat, combat support or 
combat service support operations.  While the rehabilitation process predominantly 
involves delivering resources and providing assistance from the strategic base, some 
provision may also be made available from within the joint operations area.  To 
achieve effective rehabilitation we must consider and plan for the following.
a. A stated requirement of the level of combat power that must be achieved 
or res
tored, within a specified timeframe, to calculate and allocate the resources 
ne
eded to conduct rehabilitation.
b. Early engagement of the strategic base, and Defence Support Chain 
O
perations and Movements (DSCOM), via the Joint Task Force Headquarters 
(J
TFHQ), to prepare the equipment, materiel and strategic movement necessary 
to meet rehabilitation requirements.
c. Early engagement with industry to enable maintenance, or replacement, of 
e
quipment to be planned. 
Section 2 – Rehabilitation
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 173
d. Moving the unit or formation into a permissive environment for 
re
habilitation.  This is a command decision and is determined by:
• 
risk assessment; and
• the urgency of the return to current operations or redeployment.
e. Assigning a dedicated rehabilitation commander to establish effective 
c
ommand and control of the rehabilitation process.  The commander is 
nominated by the Joint Task Force Headquarters and is unlikely to come from 
the J4 area.  The rehabilitation commander is required to task-organise the 
elements needed to support rehabilitation (Joint Task Force Headquarters J4 will 
guide and inform this requirement).
f. Establishing a rehabilitation support organisation.  The rehabilitation 
s
upport organisation provides life support facilities and force protection for 
both the force elements concerned, and those delivering the rehabilitation 
services (including any civilian personnel engaged in delivering rehabilitation).  
Life support facilities in this context include: 
• adequate shelter and facilities for resting, sleeping and eating;
• administration and welfare; 
• medical care (including, casualty treatment, post traumatic stress 
disorder assessment, disease prevention and evacuation); and
• suitable berths and port facilities  for rehabilitating maritime force 
elements. 
However, if the necessary life support facilities are already established in a main 
operating base within the joint operations area, we may not require a separate 
support organisation.
g. Re-establishing unit strength through:
• 
allocating reinforcement personnel to replace battle casualties and 
other losses;
• replenishing unit stocks;
• replacing lost materiel; and
• recovering, repairing and servicing equipment.  
This may also require heavy engineering support ships or shore capability for 
maritime force elements.
Restoring combat power
”
“
The 
rehabilitation 
commander 
is nominated 
by the Joint 
Task Force 
Headquarters 
and is unlikely 
to come from the 
J4 area.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)174
h. Personnel reinforcements replacing bat tle casualties are required to 
conduct reception, staging, onward movement and integration activities to 
enhanc
e their operational skills and establish unit and formation cohesion.  
This is particularly important if rehabilitation is part of a wider redeployment 
activity involving new task organisations.  Integration may require some training 
elements (for example, check zero of weapon systems) which need to be 
planned and resourced. 
9.5. Like deployment, redeployment is a J3-led, multi-agency activity, closely 
supported by J4.  Redeployment can be as simple as executing the deployment 
force element table in reverse, or may involve a highly complex process.  Regardless 
of the level of complexity, it is vital that redeployment is planned and correctly 
synchronised.  J3/J5161 planners should be considering redeployment from the 
beginning of initial deployment planning.162
161 J1-J9 are recognised military branches.  J3 – operations; J4 – logistics; J5 – plans.
162 Planning redeployment from the beginning of the operation is particularly important for 
non-enduring operations.
163 Joint Service Publication (JSP) 904, Op BROCKDALE: The Redeployment of British forces from Iraq 2009. 
Section 3 – Redeployment
Operation BROCKDALE
Operation BROCKDALE163  is the operation that extracted British forces not required for 
the subsequent training and mentoring tasks from South East Iraq between May and 
September 2009.  Operation BROCKDALE was delivered in four phases – Phases 2 to 4 
took four months from beginning to end and the need for Phase 4 only emerged once 
the operation had begun.  Command of Operation BROCKDALE was assigned to the 
Commander Joint Force Logistic Operations due to the scale, complexity and supported 
nature of the logistic task.
• Phase 1 was undertaken as preparatory activity and involved shaping the force 
through increasingly aggressive routine housekeeping activities and a shift towards 
an expeditionary, and therefore more austere, footing.  The aim was to reduce 
the logistic footprint as much as feasible, without risking continued delivery of 
operational effect.    
• Phase 2 involved extracting the force and its materiel through Kuwait.  
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 175
9.6. Though redeployment is similar in proc ess to deployment, the critical difference 
is the need to return equipment and stores built up in theatre over a period of time 
to the strategic base, or deploy them to another joint operations area.  This element 
of redeployment must include a rigorous audit process to support redeployment 
governance. 
9.7. Early and continued focus on redeployment enables J4 staff to review 
in-theatre stock levels and materiel holdings with a proactive view.  Where possible, 
we must reduce theatre holdings and inform revision of the theatre sustainability 
statement.  The Permanent Joint Headquarters’ (PJHQ’s) Operational Planning Group 
(Redeployment), with representatives from Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S) 
and front line commands, provides direction on:
• materiel destinations;
• redeployment priorities; and
• condition states.  
• Phase 3 covered rehabilitation, redeploy ment and recuperation of the force, 
predominantly to, and in, the UK, but some resources were diverted to support 
Operation HERRICK in Afghanistan.  
• Phase 4 closed the operation, establishi ng a position where the only UK forces 
remaining in theatre were under diplomatic clearance or NATO command. 
Operation BROCKDALE introduced the concept of ‘proof of good order’.  This required the 
collection, collation and cataloguing of documentary evidence, throughout the withdrawal 
process, to record and demonstrate compliance with mandated procedures and established 
best practice.  As a result, the Secretary of State was able to confirm, on 10 July 2009, that 
value for money had been achieved:
‘The withdrawal of UK forces from Iraq has been conducted in good 
order and with consummate skill and I congratulate everyone who 
has been involved.  This is intelligent logistics at its best, ensuring 
value for money for the tax payer.’ 
Secretary of State for Defence, Bob Ainsworth
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)176
9.8. Even for simple, non-enduring interventions, we are likely to take a significant 
time to complete redeployment.  Therefore, the redeployment process should start 
as early as is operationally practical.  Depending on the nature of the operation, it 
is highly likely that additional logistic staff and force elements will be needed to 
redeploy the force successfully.  Before extraction, all force elements should expect 
to move to an austere, expeditionary footing and reduce to the minimum support 
compatible with operational requirements. 
9.9. Command and control.  During the redeployment phase of an op eration, the 
logistic headquarters is normally the supported headquarters.  To coordinate and 
execute a complex redeployment, PJHQ may deploy an additional headquarters, 
for example, a joint force logistic component headquarters or a logistic brigade 
headquarters.165  Liaison staff, and embedded specialist teams, should be deployed 
early in the planning process to assist with internal (UK national, such as, between 
DE&S and theatre) and external (for example, between coalition partners or with the 
host nation) coordination. 
9.10. Quantifying the redeployment requirement.  Visibility across the joint 
op
erations area is critical to quantifying the redeployment requirement.  Visibility is 
enabled by logistic information systems and depends on recording and analysing 
high quality data.  Developing an accurate redeployment database166 early on 
assists planning.  To ease access for personnel in the joint operations area (including 
multinational partners) and in the strategic base, the theatre database should be 
hosted on the lowest possible classification information system. 
9.11. Redeployment database.  The database should be an end to end tracking tool 
which al
so includes information from the initial deployment (what stores, sent to 
which location, by which cost effective means).  Capturing this information during the 
deployment phase helps to populate the redeployment database and provides the 
basis of the audit trail that underpins demonstration of proof of good order. 
164 During Operations TELIC and BROCKDALE, the main operating base in Basra was referred to as the 
Contingency Operating Base.
165 For further information on logistic command and control, see Chapter 2.
166 For Operation BROCKDALE the theatre database was known as the Compendium; in Operation 
HERRICK it became the e-Compendium.
In the case of Operation BROCKDALE, the proximity of Kuwait to the main operating base164  
simplified the redeployment by reducing the force protection challenges for road movement 
and provided benign host-nation port facilities.  However, the complexity and volume 
of materiel still required four months to extract the force from Iraq over a relatively short 
distance.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 177
9.12. Multinational cooperation.  As part of a multinational or coalition deployment, 
w
e need to make sure the redeployment database is accessible to all partners and 
authorised multinational headquarters.  We may be required to de-conflict and 
re-prioritise elements of our redeployment plan to work collaboratively and 
effectively with multinational partners.  By doing so we may reduce the pressure on 
the reverse supply chain and provide more cost effective redeployment.
Redeployment planning
9.13. Outline.  Redeployment operations have four broad sequential phases167 which 
usually overlap and develop incrementally.  The way we plan for, and conduct, 
redeployment depends on:
• the threat; 168  
• operational and political imperatives; 
• the resilience169 of redeployment lines of communication and associated 
infrastructure; 
• geographic factors; and
• the level of coalition/host-nation support.  
Annex 9A provides a summary of the generic redeployment process and Annex 9B 
outlines logistic considerations for each of the redeployment phases.
9.14. Planning.  Due to intervening operational developments, it is highly unlikely that 
w
e can use the original deployment logistic estimate to shape redeployment.  PJHQ, 
and the Joint Task Force Commander, must therefore use the Logistic Planning Team 
to consider redeployment issues, and develop the redeployment plan, throughout 
the operation.  Annex 9C provides an indicative list of planning considerations, which 
include visibility and maintained awareness of the operational situation.
167 Shape, extract, redeploy and operation closure.
168 The operational environments for Operation GRANBY (Iraq 1991) and Operation OCULUS (Bosnia 
Herzegovina) were permissive.  Operation BROCKDALE (Iraq 2008/9) was non-permissive but assisted by: 
a relief-in-place; considerable support from US forces; and the presence of the safe haven in Kuwait at the 
end of a relatively short line of communication from Basra.
169 Resilience can be established in many ways; for example, multiple lines of communication or levels 
of sustainment held in theatre, though they, in turn, increase the complexity/scale of the redeployment 
operation.  Resilience is enhanced by a flexible and agile redeployment plan.
Restoring combat power
“
”
We may be 
required to 
de-conflict and 
re-prioritise 
elements 
of our 
redeployment 
plan to 
work with 
multinational 
partners.  By 
doing so we 
may reduce 
the pressure 
on the reverse 
supply chain and 
provide more 
cost effective 
redeployment.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)178
9.15. Operational Planning Group (Redeployment).  Depending on the expected 
dura
tion and size of the deployed operation, PJHQ may need to establish an  
Operational Planning Group (Redeployment) to provide direction and guidance to 
the Joint Task Force Commander as the staff develop the redeployment plan.171  The 
complexity of the redeployment drives the size of, and range of areas represented at, 
the Operational Planning Group (Redeployment).  For short-duration operations, the 
group could be formed during the initial planning phase, as part of the PJHQ Logistic 
Planning Team. 
9.16. Operational Planning Group (Redeployment) tasks.  The Operational Planning 
G
roup (Redeployment) performs the following tasks.
a. Approve the treatment of in-theatre materiel holdings.  For example, 
whether equipment or stocks are to be:
• returned to the strategic base;
• deployed to a new operational area;
• disposed of in theatre; or
• gifted to the host nation.
This is commonly known as the sentencing process.  Evidence of all sentencing 
decisions forms the basis of the audit trail that supports proof of good order. 172
b. Provide direction and, where requir ed, set the treatment and sentencing 
standards.  For example, the Operational Planning Group (Redeployment) sets 
vehicle theatre-exit standards. 
c. Track and monitor all items deployin g and redeploying from the operational 
theatre.  This is a key element in informing and maintaining visibility of assets 
along the reverse supply chain and supports the end-to-end tracking tool. 
170 J1-J9 are recognised military branches.  J2 – intelligence.
171 The Operational Planning Group (Redeployment) is established in the strategic base.
172 For more detail on proof of good order see paragraph 9.22.
Operation BROCKDALE was undertaken in a non-benign environment, through a friendly 
neighbouring country, over a relatively short line of communication.  A key lesson identified 
was that the early withdrawal of J2170 staff from the operation significantly reduced 
operational awareness through the loss of their contribution to the intelligence picture, and 
this increased the risk to the remaining force.  Intelligence was subsequently provided by a 
coalition partner.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 179
Operation HERRICK redeployment
Operation HERRICK Redeployment is the phase of operation that extracted, from 
Afghanistan, those British forces that were not required for the subsequent training 
and mentoring tasks.  Planning for this activity commenced in 2012; the main effort 
was executed in 2014. 
HERRICK Redeployment continued the concept of ‘proof of good order’ introduced 
during Operation BROCKDALE.  The process was overseen by the Operational 
Planning Group (Redeployment) and supported by the ‘e-Compendium’ (the software 
solution that allowed for joint decision-making).  The Operational Planning Group 
(Redeployment) focused on making value for money decisions, including options such 
as local gifting, in-theatre disposal or return to UK.  The Group was chaired by Defence 
Support Chain Operations and Movement; Service commands and project teams 
participated. 
Early activity involved aggressive housekeeping, sustainability statement reviews and a 
shift towards an expeditionary, and therefore more austere, footing.  As with Operation 
BROCKDALE, the aim was to reduce the logistic footprint as much as feasible, without 
risking operational effect.  One example of the housekeeping activity was forward 
basing an urgent operational requirement small arms ammunition incinerator.  
1400 tonnes of unserviceable small arms ammunition was disposed of through the 
incinerator, greatly reducing the strategic lift burden.  Collapsing the forward operating 
base network took place in a staged manner, drawing the deployed force back to 
Camp Bastion before its closure as the main operating base at the end of 2014. 
From a strategic point of view, significant effort was applied to creating resilience in 
the lines of communication in and out of theatre.  This activity included using fly-
sail options through Middle-East bases and ground lines of communication through 
Pakistan, to the South, and via the Northern Distribution Network. 
Strategic base planning was linked throughout to the changes in operational planning.  
This included using operational analysis to ensure the strategic base did not constrain 
redeployment.  Significant strategic base activity continued into 2015, particularly:
• receiving materiel at key nodes such as Marchwood;
• restocking activity within the Logistic Commodities and Services enterprise; 
and
• recuperation activity within Service commands.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)180
9.17. Redeployment estimate.  In most cases, planners should carr y out a full 
redeployment estimate at each of the strategic, operational and tactical levels.  The 
estimates should include a logistic estimate and be supported by decision support 
tools, such as the Coupling Bridge Analysis Tool (COBRAT).173  The redeployment 
estimate follows the same format as an estimate for deployment.  Deployed 
components therefore need the capacity to conduct a redeployment estimate and 
then to plan iteratively to adapt to political or operational changes.  For a complex 
redeployment, the estimates support the following actions:
• PJHQ issues a joint commander’s directive, which would include a logistic 
annex;
• PJHQ J4 Joint Mounting Cell issues redeployment instructions that would 
include a joint mounting order, a coupling bridge directive and a strategic 
movements instruction (similar to those covered in Chapter 6); and
• the Joint Task Force Commander and logistic staff (or the deployed joint 
logistic headquarters, if established) generate and issue relevant theatre-level 
orders and instructions to direct and coordinate redeployment activity.
Joint desired order of departure
9.18. Through the redeployment planning process, PJHQ and the Joint Task Force 
Commander determine a joint desired order of departure.  The joint desired order 
of departure takes account of continuing operational responsibilities and force 
protection requirements to set out the sequence and timescale in which personnel 
and materiel should be removed from the joint operations area.  The joint desired 
order of departure is shaped by:
• priorities at the redeployment destination;
• in-theatre synchronisation; and
• availability of movement assets. 
9.19. Destination priorities.  DSCOM coordinates and de-conflicts the joint desired 
order of dep
arture.  In doing so, it incorporates front line commands’ requirements for 
returning key equipments and the repair agents’ and base depots’ abilities to receive 
equipment for repair.  The joint desired order of departure is also influenced by any 
need to conduct follow-on or new operations.
173 The Coupling Bridge Analysis Tool (COBRAT) has been developed by Assistant Chief of Defence 
Staff (Logistic Operations) Operational Analysis Team and allows users to map available resources against 
supply, movement and handling requirements for a joint force element table.
Restoring combat power
”
“
The joint 
desired order 
of departure 
takes account 
of continuing 
operational 
responsibilities 
and force 
protection 
requirements 
to set out the 
sequence and 
timescale in 
which personnel 
and materiel 
should be 
removed from 
the joint 
operations 
area.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 181
9.20. Synchronisation.  Withdrawing capabilities from the join t operations area needs 
to be synchronised with the departure of:
• personnel;
• materiel; and
• deployed contractors.  
J3/J5 normally lead in developing the redeployment synchronisation matrix and the 
matrix is managed by the deployed logistic headquarters.
a. Planners must recognise that the force’s continuing operational posture 
requires the redeployment plan to maintain an irreducible minimum capability 
(which will vary as the operation approaches closure).  Therefore the planned 
and actual flow along the reverse supply chain may not be steady and will 
inevitably face surges as redeployment activity intensifies.  
b. Consignment tracking along the leng th of the reverse supply chain helps 
us to monitor the synchronisation matrix and manage the flow.  Consignment 
tracking relies on logistic information systems.  Establishing in-theatre DE&S 
liaison staff and providing dedicated support chain specialists:
• aids understanding between theatre and the strategic base;
• enhances reverse supply chain efficiency; and
• assists with proof of good order. 
9.21. Movement assets.  The availability of movement assets significantly influences 
the join
t desired order of departure and synchronisation matrix.  Planners should 
therefore build in some redundancy when allocating movement assets to the 
redeployment plan, particularly if force elements are redeploying directly to another 
operational location.  It is therefore important we understand the size of the 
redeployment task in relation to the available movement assets and should give high 
priority to capturing force element table data as early as possible.
Proof of good order
9.22. Proof of good order (POGO) encompasses a set of processes that demonstrate 
agreed standards of probity have been maintained throughout the redeployment 
operation.  POGO processes are mandated by regulations and supported by auditable 
documentation.  They are liable to National Audit Office and Public Accounts 
Committee scrutiny.  
Restoring combat power
”
“
The force’s 
continuing 
operational 
posture 
requires the 
redeployment 
plan to 
maintain an 
irreducible 
minimum 
capability; 
therefore, 
the planned 
and actual 
flow along the 
reverse supply 
chain may not 
be steady and 
will inevitably 
face surges.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)182
9.23. POGO requires documentary evidence to be recorded throughout the 
redeployment process.  This evidence includes the rationale for all Operational 
Planning Group (Redeployment) decisions on expenditure, gifting and disposals, and 
confirmation that infrastructure and land have been returned to their original owner 
or appropriate authority.  Effective POGO reflects the following four key factors.
a. POGO is not a post-operation activity.  POGO processes must be conducted 
at the same time as redeployment activities and the governance structures 
should be in place throughout (including assigned personnel, records database 
and reporting and audit processes).
b. POGO should be promoted and supported from the highest level and the 
necessary resources should be dedicated to the task.
c. The command should make sure the force fully understands which 
regulations govern its activities and should rigorously check adherence to those 
regulations.  The command should also provide feedback on POGO progress 
and achievements.
d. Engaging early with the National Audit Office, Her Majesty’s Treasury 
and relevant MOD policy teams (Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic 
Operations) (ACDS (Log Ops)) and DE&S) is vital to set the parameters and 
establish the processes. 
Key redeployment enablers
9.24. Surge logistic capability.  Specific enablers may deploy to the joint operations 
area t
o help close locations, assist with drawing down support activities and provide 
specialist assets, skills and advice to redeploy personnel and materiel.  Contractors 
may often deliver this function and early planning and integration can enable this.  
Functions could include:
• port of embarkation activities;
• removing temporary infrastructure;
• repackaging or disposing materiel and ammunition; and
• preparing equipment for onward movement. 
9.25. Returned stores team.  Deploying a returned stores team, generated by DE&S 
(
Logistic Commodities and Services), increases in-theatre stores backload capability 
with their expertise and technical knowledge.  It is known as the ANVIL174 effect.  
174 ANVIL is not an abbreviation but derives from the title Op ANVIL which was originally given to the 
process during Operation BROCKDALE.
Restoring combat power
”
“
POGO is not a 
post-operation 
activity.  POGO 
processes 
must be 
conducted at 
the same time 
as redeployment 
activities and 
the governance 
structures 
should be 
in place 
throughout.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 183
The effect is usually delivered through advice and guidance to in-theatre logistic 
personnel rather than by hands-on packing activity by the team.  The outcome is 
correctly packed and labelled stores, which can be handled quickly and received 
effectively back into the strategic base.  This is particularly important for high priority 
assets and commodities and also contributes to effective preparation for future 
operations.
9.26. Equipment triage.  The theatre materiel database defines the size and scope 
of the re
deployment task.  Confirming equipment theatre exit standards (set by the 
Operational Planning Group (Redeployment)) early, shapes the size and capability of 
equipment support resources required to complete that task.  Operational factors 
permitting, land-based equipment holders should retain ownership of equipment 
until the theatre exit standard for each item is met.  Triaging equipment forward, 
in-theatre, to prepare for depth repair by DE&S Logistic Services can reduce the 
subsequent recuperation times.  Triage can be conducted before equipment is loaded 
on to ships or aircraft.  Each item of equipment should be inspected by equipment 
support force elements (augmented by a theatre equipment returns section).175  The 
inspection provides a list of repairs and spare parts required for depth repair by 
Logistic Services.  Having those spares then available for each item of equipment 
when it arrives in the strategic base reduces the time it is waiting for repair.  The 
list of repairs also allows repair capacity to be prioritised to include support to 
other commitments.  Maritime commanders should seek to exploit operational 
maintenance and repair capabilities176 to rehabilitate, recuperate or salvage force 
elements.
Roles and responsibilities
9.27. Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic Operations).  ACDS (Log Ops) leads 
the lo
gistic input to redeployment planning for enduring, large scale or best effort 
operations.  This is due to the significant volumes and value of materiel building up 
in theatre and the level of resources and investment therefore needed to deliver 
redeployment.  Redeployment from large scale NATO and coalition operations 
faces increased complexity because the finite resources have to be allocated to 
the collective benefit of the combined force.  Redeployment from multinational 
operations may be coordinated through a joint logistic support group headquarters, 
or a combined joint support group headquarters.177  
175 Operation BROCKDALE’s theatre returns section consisted of vehicle, equipment and stock 
specialists from DE&S’ Defence Support Group and Defence Storage and Distribution Agency.  Both have 
now been replaced within Logistic Commodities and Services.
176 Book of Reference (digital) (BRd) 2002, Maritime Operational Logistics , Chapter 11, Operational 
Maintenance and Repair.
177 See Chapter 2 for further information on the Joint Logistic Support Group and Combined Joint 
Support Group.
Restoring combat power
“
”
Operational 
factors 
permitting, 
land-based 
equipment 
holders should 
retain ownership 
of equipment 
until the 
theatre exit 
standard for 
each item is 
met. 

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)184
9.28. Redeployment policies.  To guide subsequent activity, ACDS (Log Ops) considers 
and implemen
ts a number of key redeployment policies before formalising the 
overall redeployment plan.178  These policies include those: 
• pertaining to disposal and gifting of  materiel and other assets in theatre;
• covering carriage security measures, for instance for items attractive to 
 criminal and terrorist organisations; and
• that determine the proof of good order requirements of the operation.
This list is not exhaustive but providing such key policies early in the planning 
process is essential.  The redeployment plan is then staffed through PJHQ and Service 
commands for comment and then refined, before being formally issued for them to 
implement.
9.29. Permanent Joint Headquarters.  PJHQ is responsible for planning and executing 
re
deployment from the joint operations area to the ports of disembarkation (in 
the strategic base or in the joint operations area of a separate operation).  Which 
headquarters is chosen to lead in delivering redeployment from within the joint 
operations area is influenced by a number of factors including:
• size;
• scale;
• complexity; and
• operational concurrency. 
The relevant J4 staff area, or joint logistic headquarters, supports the theatre 
headquarters that commands the redeployment operation.179  After cohering the 
plans, PJHQ issues a redeployment instruction.  This includes a logistic annex and 
clearly articulates the roles and responsibilities of the Service commands and DSCOM.
9.30. Service commands.  Service commands are responsible for implementing 
the plan and pro
viding resources to extract the deployed force, its personnel and 
its materiel to the ports of embarkation.  As a part of its support to redeployment, 
the deployed logistic headquarters may provide additional joint resources.  
Service commands are also responsible for onward movement from the port of 
disembarkation to strategic base locations.  Figure 9.2 illustrates redeployment 
flow.180  
178 Recognising the level of preparation and organisational support necessary to achieve it, 
redeployment is often given the status of an operation in its own right.
179 See Chapter 2 for further information on the options for deployed logistic command and control 
nodes.
180 For the maritime environment, the redeployment flow diagram (Figure 9.2) relates to shore-based 
maritime force elements, personnel and materiel deployed within the joint operations area, including 
amphibious force elements not recovered aboard task group shipping.
Restoring combat power
“
”
Service 
commands are 
responsible for 
implementing 
the plan and 
providing 
resources to 
extract the 
deployed force 
to the ports of 
embarkation.   
The deployed 
logistic 
headquarters 
may provide 
additional joint 
resources. 

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 185
Legend
ACDS            Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff(Log Ops)    (Logistic Operations)   APOD Air port of disembarkationAPOE  Air port of embarkationDE&S Defence Equipment and SupportDSCOM Defence Support Chain Operations    and Movements
FLC Front line commandOPG(R) Operational Planning Group   (Redeployment)PJHQ Permanent Joint HeadquartersRPOD Rail port of disembarkationRPOE Rail port of embarkationSPOD Sea port of disembarkation
Synchronisation matrix
Developed by Joint Commander,
de-conflicted by DSCOM
PJHQ responsibility FLC/DE&S responsibility
Concentration
area
Assembly
area
Staging
area
Marshalling
area
Unit 
location
DE&S
Exchange 
point
Transit camp
(if required)
Convoy 
support centre
(if required)
Holding
area
RPOE
RPOD
Holding
area
SPOD
Holding
area
Holding
area
SPOE
APOD
Holding
area
Holding
area
APOE
SPOE Sea port of embarkationsSCs Single-Service commands
Coupling 
Bridge
Joint operations area Strategic base
PJHQ OPG(R)
Attended by DE&S, ACDS (Log Ops),
Joint Forces Command/sSCs
Figure 9.2 – Redeployment flow  
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)186
9.31. Defence Equipment and Support.  DSCOM is responsible, acting on PJHQ’s 
b
ehalf, for coordinating and de-conflicting personnel and materiel movement 
and flow-back into the strategic base or to another joint operations area.  Its role is 
essential to planning and executing PJHQ’s redeployment plan effectively.  DSCOM, 
therefore, needs to be involved in redeployment planning from the outset.  Defence 
and commercial resource limitations are an important consideration and may require 
the plan timelines to be extended.  Some considerations within the two key areas are 
as follows.
a. Personnel.  Returning personnel efficiently to strategic base locations is a 
s
ignificant J4 movement activity.  It should not be interrupted by other priorities, 
except in the most urgent and important operational circumstances.  There is an 
additional administration and movement requirement for reserves, individual 
augmentees and contract personnel.181  
b. Materiel.  The onward movement of materiel from ports of disembarkation 
i
s likely to require additional personnel and transport assets, including 
commercial support.  Wherever possible we should try to achieve the following.
• Vehicles returning from operations should be in a road-legal condition 
to allow them to be driven on public roads. 
• In-theatre assessment and triage of  air and maritime assets should be 
conducted to identify what operational specific equipment may need to 
be removed (the resulting removal is usually completed in theatre).
• International civilian regulations and national security imperatives 
should be complied with (they dictate what further materiel is to be 
removed from, or refitted to, maritime, land or air assets).
When extracting from a contested joint operations area, these functions should 
be conducted at a forward operating base, at a safe haven or in quarantined 
areas within the strategic base. 
9.32. DE&S specialist support.  DE&S is also responsible for deploying liaison staff and 
sp
ecialist teams to:
• support redeployment planning and execution;
• make sure liaison between theatre, DE&S agencies and industrial partners is 
effective;
181 This requirement is covered more fully in JDP 1-05, Personnel Support for Joint Operations .  All force 
elements deployed as part of the Whole Force must be considered and their J1 requirements met.
Restoring combat power
“
”
Returning 
personnel 
efficiently to 
strategic base 
locations is a 
significant J4 
movement 
activity.  It 
should not 
be interrupted 
by other 
priorities, 
except in the 
most urgent 
and important 
operational 
circumstances.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 187
• assess materiel condition;
• carry out in-theatre reconditioning of materiel; and 
• prepare consignments for return to the strategic base.
9.33. Recuperation mainly takes place in the strategic base and, as previously 
defined,182 is designed to bring force elements and materiel back to their 
pre-operational readiness level (Rx) or to the level required by revised standards.183  
Where resources are attributed to more than one contingent task, force programmers 
must make sure that those contingencies remain sustainable through other means, or 
are recognised as unachievable, while those resources are recuperating.
9.34. Readiness.  Readiness is the time required to f ully prepare a force element, from 
its current state, to carry out the tasks for which it is organised, equipped and trained.  
Force element readiness is measured by:
• manpower strength;
• equipment state; and
• collective performance training level.
Defence Strategic Direction mandates the readiness levels that force elements should 
achieve as they recuperate from contingent operations and return to being capable 
of carrying out the full range of operations demanded of them by Defence Plan 
concurrency assumptions.  These generic targets are only valid if force elements are 
operating at, or within, routine concurrency levels.
9.35. Roles and responsibilities.  Recuperation is conducted by Service commands 
and, where depth rep
air and replacement materiel is necessary, is supported by DE&S.  
Recuperation is generally conducted in the strategic base for the land environment 
but can be conducted elsewhere for maritime and air environments. 
9.36. Planning factors.  Planning for, and reporting on, recuperation must encompass 
all asp
ects of force generation and sustainability, specifically:
182 See paragraph 9.1.c.
183 Allied Procedural Publication (APP)-17, Retrograde of Materiel outlines the concepts and principles 
for NATO forces on the proper return of stores and equipment to rear areas including designated storage, 
repair, recycling or disposal.  UK forces should also refer to JSP 886, Defence Logistics Support Chain Manual 
which is to be subsumed by the Defence Logistics Framework during 2015.
Section 4 – Recuperation
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)188
• manpower – replacing operational losses and achie ving harmony guidelines;
• equipment – replacing, repairing and servicing equipment;
• training – rebuilding individual and c ollective performance; and
• sustainability – replacing logistic resources.
End state 
9.37. Recuperation is a vital process in ensuring all force elements, personnel and 
equipment are prepared and ready to conduct future contingent operations – with 
their combat power fully restored.  If completed correctly, recuperation delivers 
the proof of good order-compliant redeployed force in a state ready for operation-
specific collective training.
A.1. 
Key points 
• Restoring combat power is the overall process that returns units to operational 
readiness for current or future operations.  Activities include rehabilitation, 
redeployment and recuperation and, more recently, transition.  
• Rehabilitation  provides flexibility to prepare a deployed force, its personnel or 
equipment following combat operations either for continued operations in the 
present theatre or for redeployment to the strategic base or to an operation in a 
separate theatre.
• Redeployment  is a complete operation involving preparation and relocation 
of units, personnel and/or materiel to a new destination (the strategic base or 
a separate theatre) while demonstrating proof of good order.  Redeployment 
can be either a simple or a complex operation, as determined by the scale and 
nature of the deployment.  In the same way as deployment is, redeployment is 
a J3-led, multi-agency activity, closely supported by J4 and, in particular, logistic 
assets.  J3/J5 planners should be considering redeployment from the beginning 
of initial deployment planning.
• Recuperation  primarily takes place in the strategic base and is designed to bring 
force elements, personnel and materiel back to their pre-operational readiness 
level or to levels to meet revised standards.
• Recovery  is the general term used within the force generation cycle to include 
the three activities of: rehabilitation; redeployment; and recuperation.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 189
Legend
ACDS  Assistant Chief of  the Defence Staff
(Log Ops)    (Logistic Operations)
DE&S Defence Equipment and Support
DSCOM Defence Support Chain Operations 
 and Movements
FP Force protection
JDOD Joint desired order of departure
Ops Operations
OPG(R) Operational Planning Group 
 (Redeployment)
POGO Proof of good order
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
Redeployment database
Will inform and quantify size of 
redeployment task, underpinned 
by logistic information systems
For redeployment from enduring 
or best-eﬀort operations, ACDS 
(Log Ops) will lead J4 planning
Consideration 
of key factors
See Annex 9C
Availability of 
movement assets
Informed by DSCOM
Synchronisation matrix
Developed by Joint Commander
De-conﬂicted by DSCOM
Underpinned by POGO and the ANVIL effect
J3 informed
Ops/FP/Medical 
requirements etc.
PJHQ OPG(R)
Attended by DE&S, ACDS (Log Ops), 
JFC/SC and DSCOM
JDOD
Issued by PJHQ
Joint Mounting Order 
and Coupling Bridge Directive
Issued by PJHQ J4 Mounting
Requirement de-conflicted and 
coordinated by DSCOM
In-theatre assistance from
t  Logistic capability surge
t  Stores team
t  Equipment triage team
PJHQ Redeployment Instruction
Will include a logistic annex
Annex 9A – Redeployment 
process
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)190
Annex 9B – Redeployment phases – 
logistic considerations
Shape
Extract
Redeploy
Operation 
closure
t Scope the size and nature of the redeployment task.
t Establish Defence priorities for in-theatre equipments, materiel and infrastructure.
t Deﬁne the theatre equipment exit standards.
t Conduct aggressive in-theatre housekeeping to backload surpluses.
t Augment in-theatre with key logistic staﬀ and capabilities.
t Augment liaison arrangements with coalition partners, host nation and strategic base agencies.
t Return to an expeditionary footing.
t Provide suﬃcient logistic support resilience to deal with likely enemy action and hasty withdrawal requirements.
t Withdraw to secure nodes while maintaining optimal balance of in-theatre support to meet current and 
anticipated operational requirements.
t Conduct in-theatre disposal (including destruction, sale, gifting and handover).
t Remediate former locations. Use reach-back support and liaison with strategic base.
t Collate, account for and prepare recovered materiel for onward sea and air movement to the strategic base or 
other joint operations area.
t Provide support for any enduring UK presence in the joint operations area.
t Close operational accounts.
t Transfer residual tasks to appropriate custodians.
t Complete proof of good order (POGO).
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 191
Annex 9C – Redeployment planning 
considerations
Consideration Factor
Operational situation Visibility and understanding of the current oper ational situation (and its resultant manpower, equipment and 
sustainment requirements) is essential when the force is to extract from a contested environment.
Key equipment Joint Forces Command and Service commands need to highlight to the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) any 
equipment which needs to be redeployed as a priority (for the joint desired order of departure).  Key equipment could 
include items required for future tasking.
Redeployment database Logistic staff  must maintain a central asset register when deployed, using either national/allied logistic information 
systems or, if unavailable, a local solution.  A redeployment database makes sure that all materiel is accounted for (and accurate estimates made of quantities and values) to inform the redeployment plan.
Redeployment planning principles
• Exploit.  Use available coalition or alliance support and strengthen liaison capacity and effectiveness.
• Dispose.  Where authorised, dispose of benign materiel and equipment we do not need to retain as close to the point of use as 
 possible.
• Embed.  Position key staff well in advance to augment the redeployment planning and execution capacity of the ‘in-theatre’ force. 
• Deploy.  Military and civilian subject matter experts from the UK st rategic base organisations and Service commands should be 
 deployed to harness and integrate reachback support effectively and conduct preparatory activities as far forward as possible.   Ensure appropriate command and control structures are in place and empowered to command the redeployment plan.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)192
Consideration Factor
Operational requirement The PJHQ redeployment plan must be led and informed by the Joint Commander’s operational requirements and 
priorities.
Force protection 
requirement
The redeployment plan must ensure that the remaining force elements (including the redeployment assets) are provided with adequate force protection.
Aggressive housekeeping Preparatory aggressive housekeeping is essential for redeployment.  Reducing stock holdings, stock re-balancing and 
reverse supply chain activity, where operationally acceptable, reduce the amount of materiel to be returned with the fi nal 
force elements.
Enduring sustainment Logistic sustainability should be maintained throughout the r edeployment process.  The operational situation in the 
joint operations area and reliability of lines of communication determine the extent to which sustainment stocks can be reduced to match personnel and equipment departures.
Sensitive equipment Redeploying sensitive equipment and protectively marked items (including items attractive to criminal and terrorist 
organisations) requires special attention to make sure handling procedures and operational security are complied with.  In addition, support requirements for specifi c materiel, particularly scarce or specialist items, infl uence their position in 
the joint desired order of departure.
Bio-control Personnel and materiel redeployed from operations must not be permitted to introduce any biological hazard into the 
UK or any other nation.  The responsibility for completing bio-security measures to the requisite standard rests with unit commanders, not with movements staff .  The Joint Task Force Commander is responsible for ensuring unit commanders 
are made aware of and implement, appropriate bio-security measures.
Waste disposal Planners should not underestimate
1 requirements for waste disposal and remedial work on contaminated sites.  Failure to 
establish the arrangements needed to carry out this activity can signifi cantly delay redeployment.
1 Further detail on waste disposal is contained in Joint Service Publication (JSP) 418, MOD Corporate Environmental Protection Manua l.  This JSP is pending revision.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 193
Consideration Factor
Memorials Recovering memorials, especially unoffi  cial ones, is of signifi cant emotive interest and if carried out poorly can attract 
unwanted media and public attention and criticism.  Historical precedence2 requires this task to be resourced from non-
public funds which increases its complexity.
Handover/takeover of 
infrastructure
Handing over infrastructure and facilities to the host nation (or a follow-on nation) must be considered from the outset of redeployment planning.  This includes infrastructure that the UK has built (or put in place) which it does not intend to recover but is prepared to handover.  A defi  nitive list of assets and infrastructure needs to be determined as soon as possible.  It is therefore imperative that accurate records are maintained from the start of an operation.  Planners also 
need to consider synchronising infrastructure drawdown with continued support to combat force elements.  Engineering, estates, fi nance and contracts capabilities are required in managing handover activities and resolving problems before 
handover.
3
Disposal/gifting Determining what materiel and equipment can be gifted or disposed of in theatre and what must be returned to th e 
strategic base must be considered carefully and early.  The decisions should be informed by PJHQ J84 and assisted by the 
Disposal Services Authority.  Policy should be promulgated at the earliest opportunity to direct this process and should include the disposal and recovery of infrastructure that the UK has built or put in place.
5
Closing accounts and contracts
Closing contracts and accounts requires specialist personnel.  They should be deployed as early in the process as possible, preferably before the redeployment estimate is conducted.  They should remain in the joint operations area beyond the 
fi nal contract closure date, even if this requires special arrangements to be made for their life support.
Contractor support to operations
Deployed contractors need to be consulted, and their recovery requirements refl ected, during redeployment planning.  
In several instances, they may be providing niche capabilities which cannot be redeployed before the fi nal phase.  
Redeploying deployed contractors should be synchronised with the military redeployment plan to ensure a fully coordinated and coherent overall redeployment plan.
2 Operations BROCKDALE and HERRICK.
3 See Joint Tactics Techniques and Procedures (JTTP) 4-05, Operational Infrastructure for detailed guidance.
4 J1-J9 are recognised military branches.  J8 – resource management.5 Further guidance is given in JSP 886, The Defence Logistics Support Chain Manual which is to be subsumed by the Defence Logistics Framework during 2015.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
9C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)194
Consideration Factor
Other government 
departments/non-governmental organisations
Depending upon the type of operation, other government departments or non-governmental organisations may be in 
the joint operations area.  If other government departments’ personnel are deployed, the military redeployment plan 
should include their personnel and assets.  Any non-governmental organisation in the joint operations area should be kept informed of key redeployment timelines and decision points.
Land lines of communication
Land-based lines of communication can be complicated by factors such as:
• the need for force protection, as redeploy ment assets can provide high value targets;
• crossing multiple borders; and
• de-conflicting from other deployed allies’ need for finite resources.
Air lines of 
communication
Air ports of disembarkation.
• Air ports of disembarkation should be controlled to ensure inflow does not overwhelm storage area, 
processing rate and onward movement capacity.
• Specialist handling requirements should be understoo d in advance to ensure materiel is handled correctly.
• Alternative options for maintaining velocity (such as fr eight processing location and unit collect policy) could 
be considered. 
Port clearance Clearance from ports of disembarkation is a unit responsibility under the direction of Joint Forces Command and Service 
commands.  Reception and administrative arrangements should be fl exible enough to allow personnel and materiel to 
be administered and processed eff ectively.  Joint Forces Command and Service commands may be required to develop 
contingency quarantine arrangements and bio-security decontamination procedures.
Restoring combat power

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 195
A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A.1. Introduction. The maritime environment follows:
• 
all of the basic principles of logistics; and
• adheres to the doctrine and regulation s found in joint doctrine publications, 
 joint service publications and other relevant publications.  
However, there are some unique characteristics of maritime logistics which can, in 
turn, generate both freedoms and constraints for the joint force.  In this annex we:
• explore those characteristics;
• provide details of the structure of the Navy Command Headquarters logistics
 and infrastructure staff (positioned at the centre of naval logistic activity);
 and
• give an overview of the interactions between the Maritime Component
 Commander’s Group Logistic Coordinator (GLC) and the theatre joint logistic
 command and control node (for example, the Joint Force Logistic 
Component Headquarters).
A.2. Navy Command Headquarters – Assistant Chief of Staff Logistics and 
Inf
rastructure.  The logistics and infrastructure staff, within the support area of Navy 
C
ommand Headquarters, is headed by the 1* Assistant Chief of Staff (ACOS) Logistics 
and Infrastructure.  The headquarters staff manage the current and future logistic 
sustainability requirement for the maritime environment, including Royal Navy (RN), 
Royal Marines (RM) and Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) force elements.  Headquarters 
staff also manage the maritime environment infrastructure requirement process 
and the interface with the Defence Infrastructure Organisation.  ACOS Logistics and 
Infrastructure is:
• 1* lead for both logistics and infrastructure lines of development (on
 behalf of the Navy Board); and
• directly responsible for the logistic aspects of maritime and amphibious
 deployment, sustainment and recovery.
Annex A – Logistics in the 
maritime environment
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A
196
The logistics and infrastructure staff:
• provide assurance across Defence thro ugh the force elements at readiness 
(FE@R) and force elements at sustainability (FE@S) processes;
• produce maritime-specific logistic doctrine; 184 
• contribute to developing logistic policy;
• maintain standards and practices; and
• ensure that new maritime capabilities and platforms meet Defence’s 
sustainability requirement with effective support solutions.
Figure A.1 shows ACOS Logistics and Infrastructure’s organisational structure.
Figure A.1 – ACOS Logistics and Infrastructure organisational hierarchy
A.3. Maritime operational readiness cycle.  The maritime operational readiness 
c
ycle is implemented in the same manner as the generic operational planning 
cycle.  However, there are elements of the operational readiness cycle exclusive to 
the maritime environment.  Navy Command and Defence Equipment and Support 
(DE&S) generate and mount maritime forces to a range of readiness states (referred 
to as ‘Rx’).  This readiness activity (after completing a combat enhancement and force 
integration training phase during transit) ensures that maritime force elements are 
capable of conducting operations immediately on arrival in the joint operations area, 
without in-theatre training.  However, acclimatisation factors may require some force 
184  Book of Reference (digital) (BRd) 2002, Maritime Operational Logistics  and Classified Book (CB) 2002, 
Naval Manual of Logistics for Operations .
Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff
Support
2-star
Assistant Chief of Staff 
(Logistics and Infrastructure)
1-star
DACOS 
Land
CSS
DACOS 
Logs
Operations
DACOS 
Logs
Strat and 
Cap
DACOS 
Logs
Support
DACOS 
Operations
Support
DACOS 
Navy 
Infra Hd
Legend
CSS Combat Service Support
DACOS Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff
Infra Hd Head of Infrastructure
Logs     Logistics
Strat and Cap   Strategy and Capability
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 197
A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
elements, such as the landing force, to conduct in-theatre training, particularly in 
hostile environments.  
A.4. Restoring combat power.  Once individual force elements are no longer required 
in an op
eration (those at ‘R0+’), they can be directed to a suitable port to restore 
combat power, before being made available for further operations.  Such follow-on 
tasks may be conducted:
• within the current joint operations area, at a different intensity;
• at another geographic location u nder different operational control; or
• as an entirely different type of mission.
A.5. Recuperation.  Once their part in any further operations is complete, maritime 
for
ce elements will be directed to return to UK, during which transit force elements 
remain available for contingent tasking.  Once in the UK, maritime forces undertake a 
period of recuperation (including a period of force generation and training) to return 
them to the required readiness state.  Figure A.2 shows the maritime operational 
readiness cycle.
Figure A.2 – Maritime operational readiness cycle
FE@Rx
Rx
R0+ R0
Mission
focused
training
Further
operations
Rehabilitation
Conduct
operations
Training and 
equipment 
support
Prepare
Maintain
FE@Rx
Recuperation
Legend
FE@Rx Force elements at readiness (x = level of readiness)
R0 Ready to deploy
RIT Readiness in-theatre
Logistic support to force generation
Recuperation
Logistic sustainment
Deploy
RIT
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A
198
A.6. Maritime logistic support.  Defence Strategic Direction directs that RN units and 
their af
loat support (represented by RFA force elements) should be self-sufficient for 
28 days on arrival in theatre.  Maritime logistics’ basic principle is to use overall task 
group sustainment to provide solutions to logistic requirements from within the 
group.  
a. Individual units have their own sustainment capability, such as food, 
stores and ammunition held, and water generated, onboard.  However, that is 
supplemented by task group sustainment held within afloat support platforms. 
b. Moving sustainment between afloat support platforms (the ‘warehouse’) 
and warships (the end of the Defence Support Chain) is achieved through 
replenishment at sea directly between vessels.  
c. In common with other components, hi gh priority stores which are not held 
organically are demanded from the strategic UK base and forwarded to the 
platform using the Defence Support Chain via the Coupling Bridge.185  
d. Maritime logistic support also encompasses the operational stocks and 
support elements of the task group and, while these stocks are primarily 
allocated to the Maritime Component Commander for use, common items may 
be useful to other components.
A.7 . Types of support.  Maritime force elements access three levels of support to 
achie
ve the sustainability needed to meet operational requirements.
a. Organic.  Organic support is the logistic support contained within warships, 
to
gether with that in the accompanying RFA vessels and any commercially 
contracted shipping.
b. Host-nation support.  Where appropriate, the maritime component will 
use hos
t-nation support for services such as port facilities, accommodation, 
transport, food and water.
c. Re-supply.  Re-supply replaces expended classes of s upply neither held 
organically nor available through host-nation support.  Due to the limited 
availability of air and sealift assets, and because maritime units generally 
operate over a wide area, this is the most challenging type of logistic support.  
To meet joint force integration and prioritisation requirements, maritime force 
logisticians will require direct support from the theatre logistic command and 
control node.
185  The Coupling Bridge is described in Chapter 6, Section 4.
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 199
A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A.8. Task group logistics.  At task group level, the GLC is responsible to the Task 
G
roup Commander for coordinating maritime logistics.  To maintain a clear 
recognised theatre logistic picture of logistic capability within the task group, units 
provide sustainability information to the GLC, including:
• provisions endurance;
• fuel endurance;
• ammunition holdings; 
• stores holdings; 
• personnel numbers;
• operational defects (OPDEF); and
• any other pertinent information that may affect their operational capability 
and sustainability.  
Such information is refined and coordinated by the GLC into standard reports and 
returns.  The information can be used by the theatre logistic command and control 
node to enable the best use of stocks across the task force.  It also provides the Joint 
Task Force Commander (JTFC) with sustainability assessment within the maritime 
environment.  For example, depending on the JTFC’s priorities, any available stocks 
of operational ration packs or ammunition held to support a landing force could be 
transferred ashore to support another component.  Figure A.3 (overleaf) shows the 
GLC’s position, and linkages, within the joint logistic command and control structure.
A.9. Forward logistic sites.  Maritime support sites ashore can receive, store and 
arrange the mo
vement of personnel, mail and cargo to and from maritime force 
elements.  Before a maritime force deploys into theatre, PJHQ and Navy Command 
Headquarters will determine the requirement for forward logistic sites.  One or more 
forward logistic sites may be established within, or close to, the joint operations 
area, although the location, size and type of available facilities will depend on the 
operational requirement.  A forward logistic site is the final point on land where 
personnel, mail and cargo are held before being transferred to a ship or the first 
point they are received from a ship.  All movements entering or leaving theatre will 
normally be conducted through an advanced logistic support site186 at the port of 
embarkation or disembarkation.  Alternatively, it may be more effective to deliver 
them directly to the forward logistic site.  
A.10. Forward logistic site control.  A forward logistic site team is unlikely to have air 
asset
s directly under its tasking authority.  Movement by air or road may therefore 
need transport assets under the control of the logistic command and control 
node.  Close coordination between the GLC, forward logistic site and joint theatre 
movements staff is required to move personnel, mail and cargo to the right place, 
186  Allied Logistic Publication (ALP)-4.1, Multinational Maritime Force Logistics.
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A
200
with the priority to meet operational tasking.  Forward logistic site staff report their 
holdings and completed movements to the GLC and liaise with the logistic command 
and control node to move the items to meet the transport, usually a maritime intra-
theatre lift asset which is generated by the GLC.  Locating a forward logistic site 
ashore within the joint operations area can make it difficult for the GLC afloat to 
provide it with life support and force protection.  In such circumstances, the forward 
logistic site may be placed under operational control of the theatre logistic command 
and control node but remain under tactical control of the GLC.
A.1 1. Afloat support platforms.  The principal role of the RFA187 is to sustain and 
support maritime forces at, as well as from, the sea.  The RFA currently consists of:
187  A UK, MOD-civilian manned, government-owned support organisation within Navy Command.
N4
J4
FLC
J4
J4
DE&S
(DSCOM) CJO
Army HQ HQ Air
CJFLogO
GLC
TG Comd
MCC
FLS
FE FE FE
NCHQ
JTFC
Legend
CJO Chief of Joint Operations
CJFLogO Commander Joint Force Logistic 
Operations
DE&S Defence Equipment and Support
DSCOM Defence Support Chain Operations 
and Movements
FE Force elements
FLC Front line commanders
FLS Forward logistic site
GLC Group Logistic Coordinator
HQ Headquarters
JTFC Joint Task Force Commander
MCC Maritime Component Commander
NCHQ Navy Command Headquarters
TG Comd Task Group Commander
   Chain of command
   Maritime information flows
   Joint information flows
Figure A.3 – Logistic command and control hierarchy
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 201
A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
• eight vessels with direct afloat support roles;
• three amphibious ships; and
• two specialist support platforms.188 
All of the RFA assets can integrate with warships as part of a task group.  The main 
roles of these vessels are as described below.
a. Auxiliary oiler.  The primary role of the auxiliary oiler (AO) is to replenish 
war
ships and other auxiliaries with petroleum and water.  They are also able 
to replenish a limited range of food and stores from solid support packs.  The 
petroleum products supplied are:
• diesel;
• aviation fuel; and
• lubrication oil.189
b. Auxiliary oiler replenishment.  The auxiliary oiler replenishment (AOR) 
repleni
shes warships and auxiliaries with petroleum, oils and lubricants, water, 
ammunition, food and solid stores.  Fitted with four dual-purpose moving 
highpoint rigs, the AOR can replenish fuel and ammunition simultaneously via 
two rigs on the same side.  A Hudson Reel is also fitted to enable replenishment 
of a warship astern of the AOR. 
c. Solid support ship.  The solid support ship (AFSH) replenishes surface 
war
ships and auxiliaries with water, bulk ammunition, food and solid stores.  
d. Landing ship dock (auxiliary).  The landing ship dock (auxiliary) (LSD(A)) 
carries tro
ops, vehicles (including armour) and other equipments.  The LSD(A) 
has the capability to land them through port installations or from off-shore 
using assault craft, mexeflotes and support helicopters. 
e. Forward repair ship.  The primary role of the forward repair ship (FRS) is to 
pro
vide a mobile, stable platform for the forward repair and maintenance of 
Fleet units (primarily submarines).  The FRS can provide third line maintenance 
– Fleet Maintenance Unit or Fleet Support Unit support – for planned 
maintenance periods, operational defect rectification and damage repair.  
A.12. Other support vessels.  The amphibious shipping provides direct support to 
a landing for
ce, or acts as an element of a forward mounting base that could be 
operating some distance away from organic support.  The following RN and RFA 
188  The stated Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) numbers were correct as at June 2015.
189  Lubrication oil can also be provided in drums rather than being pumped across during 
replenishments at sea.
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A
202
vessels are also able to support other components ashore, most usually through the 
joint logistic command and control node.
a. Primary casualty receiving facility.  The primary casualty receiving 
f
acility (PCRF), RFA ARGUS, is a role 3 medical treatment facility with up to 
four operating tables and 100 beds.190  The equipment is maintained at high 
readiness, while the medical personnel are held at readiness level R2.  The 
capability is ready to accept casualties once medical personnel have embarked 
and conducted combat enhancement training/force integration training.
b. Operational maintenance and repair.  As a secondary role, the Fleet repair 
ship (
RFA DILIGENCE) possesses a limited capability to maintain and repair 
landing force vehicles.  If required, and dependent upon the situation, the 
onboard workshops could also be used to assist in maintaining and repairing 
vehicles supporting the land component force elements.
c. Landing platform helicopter.  A landing platform helicopter (LPH) such as 
HMS O
CEAN is capable of maintaining and repairing helicopters onboard.  This 
may provide an opportunity to maintain aircraft supporting components ashore 
but that depends on:
• the availability of particular aircraft spares;
• constraints on some aircraft types operating at sea; and
• the commonality between types of helicopters in the embarked tailored 
air group and those deployed ashore.
Joint planners need to consider this support when conducting the logistic 
estimate.
A.13. Operational defects.  The ability of a maritime force to meet the JTFC’s 
op
erational aims is linked, in part, to the availability of equipment and weapons 
systems.  A single defect in a maritime platform can have a disproportionate impact 
on the JTFC’s ability to deliver effect.  A defect on an aircraft carrier’s propulsion 
system may mean that it is unable to launch aircraft, or a defective submarine 
communications mast may mean that a missile strike has to be cancelled.  One of the 
key roles for the GLC is monitoring platform availability and the progress of OPDEF 
resolution.  
a. Any defect will be considered in terms of the impact it has on the operating 
capability of a force element, task group or the whole force.  OPDEFs are 
categorised in accordance with that impact.  
190  Ten intensive care, 20 high dependency and 70 normal ward beds.
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 203
A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
b. Figure A.4 shows the state codes and defect repair categories used to 
prioritise OPDEFs.  This system is similar to the system used by Fleet Air Arm, RAF 
and Army Air Corps engineers when describing an aircraft state in relation to 
stores or engineering issues.
c. Urgent OPDEFs may require movements or technical assistance from 
beyond the maritime component.  The Joint Force Logistic Component 
Headquarters prioritises and enables such requirements across the joint force.
State code (impact) Repair category
A Major capability 
inoperativ
e
1 Immediate rectifi cation required to meet a ship’s commitments/
programme.  Repair will be ship’s primary aim and will override 
existing programme intentions.
B Major capability 
sig
nifi cantly 
downgraded
2 Rectifi cation required as soon as possible to meet the ship’s 
commitments or programme.  Repair will be pursued within 
existing programme.
C All other OPDEFs 3 Rectifi cation not required until next programmed base port 
period.  Arrangements will be made to complete repair action 
then.
A.14. Fleet Operations and Maintenance Officer.  The Fleet Operations and 
Main
tenance Officer (FOMO) cell at Northwood is part of the Commander 
(Operations) organisation.  FOMO is responsible for ensuring that the chain of 
command has an accurate and comprehensive appreciation of restrictions in the 
operational capability of all Fleet units caused by materiel defects.  FOMO coordinates 
support in response to materiel OPDEF signals.  There are a number of key tasks which 
include the following.
• Generating, prioritising and coordinating operational repair plans to meet 
operational requirements, liaising with relevant output business units as 
appropriate.
• Advising on the operational implications of materiel defects.
• Directing the Fleet Stores Coordinati on Cell regarding the availability and 
movement of OPDEF-related stores.
• Seeking guidance from Fleet Command engineering staffs on matters of 
engineering policy relating to defects and their repair.
Figure A.4 – Royal Navy defect and defect repair categories
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A
204
• Attending meetings of the Fleet Command Readiness Group to provide 
operational engineering input as required.
• Arranging authorisation of out-of-hours cover for priority OPDEF related 
materiel demands.
• Assessing the need for operational reallocation of assets between units 
(known as STOROB requests) and authorising resulting action.
A.15. Host-nation support.  Host-nation support requirements for maritime forces are 
s
imilar to those of the other components and can include basing, storage facilities 
and transport.  However, the maritime component also requires some unique services 
including:
• berths;
• port pilots;
• tugs;
• cranes;
• gangways;
• alongside power supplies; and
• refuse and waste oil/fuel disposal.
Other logistic support that may be required, or available, from the host nation 
includes:
• commercially provided materiel stores;
• food (including fresh provisions);
• water;
• fuel;
• ammunition;
• medical assistance;
• moving Naval Service personnel; and 
• force protection assistance.
A.16. Port agency contract.  If available in theatre, the RN port agency contract can 
pr
ovide support to the Maritime (and other) Component Commanders.191  The port 
agency contractor ensures a local agent is nominated to manage and oversee all 
aspects of a ship’s port visit so that the ship can maintain capability to deliver its 
directed tasking.  
191  Other components will need to access the port agency contract through Navy Command 
Headquarters and their use of it may be constrained by the contract terms.
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 205
A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A.1 7 . Fleet Logistic Coordinator.  Embedded in the Fleet Operations Division in the 
Maritime O
perations Centre at Northwood, the Fleet Logistic Coordinator’s team 
delivers real-time support to all operational Fleet units.  The team provides expert 
maritime logistic advice to current operations (both single-Service and joint).  The 
team acts as the representative of Commander (Operations) in providing full 
command assurance that units are adequately supported by the Defence Support 
Chain and that UK support elements are focused on units’ operational capability.  The 
Fleet Logistic Coordinator also acts as the sponsor for the port agency contract and is 
the logistic subject matter expert for provision of fuel to the fleet.
A.18. Defence Equipment and Support deployable units.  The maritime 
c
omponent may also be supported by DE&S deployable units.  These include mine 
countermeasures vessel forward support units, salvage and marine operations 
and mobile aircraft salvage units.  These can be sited either afloat or ashore, as the 
operational situation dictates.
A.19. Class output management.  Class output management provides a one-stop-
shop for engine
ering and support matters and offices are located within each of the 
three main naval bases.  Current class output management organisations cover:
• Type 45;
• Type 23;
• Hunt class;
• Sandown class; and
• RN amphibious vessels.  
A.20. Medical support.  The maritime component is supported by a medical 
organi
sation ranging from first aid to definitive specialised care as the patient is 
evacuated.  For medical evacuation, the maritime component requests support from 
the theatre logistic command and control node to move casualties from the advanced 
logistic support site or forward logistic site back to the UK or, if necessary, to access 
host-nation support for urgent role 4 treatment.  Clinical capabilities available within 
the maritime component are described below.
a. Maritime Operations.
(1) Role 1 support is based on medically trained personnel assigned to 
e
very maritime platform.
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A
206
(2) Role 2 support is provided by  medical personnel in platforms 
specifically equipped and designated with a role 2 afloat facility (2/1/2/0)192 
as a secondary capability.
(3) Role 3 support is provided by the primary casualty receiving facility 
fitted to RFA ARGUS when it is designated as the primary casualty receiving 
ship.  This has expandable capacity from 2/2/5/15/10 to 4/4/10/20/70.193 
(4) Medical evacuation in the maritime environment is provided by 
maritime in-transit care teams allocated to assigned platforms (boats or 
helicopters).  Patients will be transferred to shore-based medical facilities 
and then strategically evacuated to UK.
(5) Command of medical support to the maritime component will be 
embedded within the maritime battle staff.
b. Littoral operations – the Lead Commando Group.  The Lead Commando 
G
roup is supported by the Commando Medical Group comprising unit aid posts, 
dental teams, a commando forward surgical group and a medical reception 
station.  
(1) Role 1 support is provided by unit aid posts embedded in combat and 
combat support forces. 
(2) Role 2 support is provided by the medical squadron of the 
Commando Logistic Regiment which includes the Commando Forward 
Surgical Group and a medical reception station.  The Commando Forward 
Surgical Group is a role 2 basic capability (2/1/2/0) and has very limited 
patient holding capability.
(3) Role 3 support is provided by either the primary casualty receiving 
facility afloat, an army field hospital or host-nation hospital care.
(4) Command of medical support to the littoral is embedded in 
3 Commando Brigade Headquarters but it is likely that additional medical 
staff will be needed in the maritime component headquarters to manage 
the operational patient care pathway.
192  The series of numbers under role 2 and 3 medical treatment facilities relates to the number of 
emergency department bays/surgical tables/intensive treatment unit beds/intermediate care ward beds 
within a facility (for example, 2/1/2/0).
193  Royal Navy intermediate care ward beds are further split between high dependency and low 
dependency as the latter are double bunk beds (for example, 2/2/5/15/10).
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 207
A
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A.21. Joint sea basing.  Joint sea basing can deliver effect in the littoral during 
e
xpeditionary operations.  It is not restricted to logistics but may include strike, 
command and control, close air support and fires.  Logistically, using RFAs, or 
commercially chartered shipping, to support other components may help reduce risk 
(for example, by reducing the logistic force protection bill ashore).  Using maritime 
basing also allows for superior environmental control of stocks and can assist the 
land component in providing greater flexibility in the short notice delivery of force 
elements, equipment and stores, even in the face of changing requirements.  Whether 
joint sea basing is used for logistic support will be determined by the logistic estimate 
process.  Joint sea basing involves a high level of coordination between the maritime 
component, Joint Task Force Headquarters and, if separate, the theatre logistic 
command and control node.  
Further details on maritime logistics can be found in:
• Book of Reference (digital) (BRd), 2002 Maritime Operational Logistics; and
• Classified Book (CB) 2002, Naval Manual of Logistics for Operations.
Logistics in the maritime environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
A
208
Logistics in the maritime environment
Notes:

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 209
Logistics in the land environment
B.1. Supporting land forces is a complex ac tivity due to an environment which, by 
its nature, is highly cluttered, congested and contested while presenting potential 
threats from multiple directions.  Land operations are often prolonged, conducted in 
arduous conditions and usually at a significant distance from the UK.  They consume 
large amounts of a wide range of materiel whilst using significant numbers of 
complex, maintenance-intensive, equipment.
The Army philosophy of land sustainment
B.2. Army capstone doctrine 194 introduces the central ideas of the Army’s approach 
to sustainment using an individual and collective philosophy of five parts.
a. Sustainment is central to fighting power.  The Army’s ability to conduct 
op
erations is derived from its fighting power.195  Sustainability forms a key 
element of the physical component of fighting power.
b. Sustainment is a means to an end.  Sustainment is a means to an end and 
should me
et the commander’s intent.  Sustainment should always support the 
mission, although there may be occasions where it is the mission, for example, 
in humanitarian assistance operations.  
c. Sustainment depends on responsibility.  Sustainment is not just the 
bus
iness of logistic personnel.  All members of the land force have an individual 
and collective responsibility for sustainment.  
d. The agility of the force depends on agile sustainment.  The contemporary 
op
erating environment blurs the distinction between the fighting and 
supporting echelons.  To enable the agility of the land force, sustainment in 
the land environment requires a support network rather than a limited number 
of linear supply chains; although that network will include a number of those 
chains.
194  AC 71940 Army Doctrine Publication, Operations.
195  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine .
Annex B – Logistics in the 
land environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)210
Logistics in the land environment
e. Soldiers first.  The military experts who provide functional sustainment 
cap
abilities are highly specialised and, in some trades, are few.  Their specialist 
skills are not usually inter-changeable, so regular employment outside their 
core discipline is rare.  However, to optimise individual, mutual and collective 
support on operations, all these experts should be ‘soldiers first’ and specialists 
second.
Delivering logistics in the land 
environment
B.3. Logistics is delivered to land forces through lines and levels of support.  
Figure B.1 shows how these correspond to the level of the formation where that 
support is delivered.
Line of support Level of support Description
1st Unit support The unit’s own logistic support (usually held within its echelon).
2nd Formation support The logistic support held within a brigade or a division.
3rd Force support The logistic support behind the rear boundary of a brigade during 
medium scale operations or of a division on large scale operations 
but forward of the theatre point of entry.
4th Home base Logistic support provided from the UK strategic base.
Figure B.1 – Lines of support
B.4. Within these lines and levels of support, land combat service support 
cap
abilities are usually organised into functional groupings:
• logistic support; 
• equipment support;
• medical support; and
• other sustainment functions. 
Logistic support
B.5. Land logistic support links a deployed force to its sustaining nodes using the 
four lines of support described in Figure B.1.  Land logistic support falls under four 
general headings.
a. Supply.  Supply provides materiel through a support network or a 
s
upply chain.  It includes activities related to procuring, storing, managing, 
consolidating and configuring supplies.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 211
Logistics in the land environment
b. Distribution.  Distribution involves moving materiel forward and dispersing 
it t
o its end users.  The supply and distribution functions will become 
increasingly integrated as they move further forwards in the supply chain.  The 
distribution function also enables the reverse supply chain.
c. Logistic support services.  Logistic support services are those logistic 
ser
vices not directly related to supply or distribution.  They include activities 
such as postal and courier services, catering and operational hygiene.
d. Specialist capabilities.  Specialist capabilities include discrete logistic 
cap
abilities such as port and maritime operations.
Equipment support
B.6. Equipment support keeps operationa l equipment available to the force in 
the required quantities by actively managing and maintaining the equipment (and 
equipment components).  Maintenance is organised into levels determined by the 
engineering content of the task.
a. Level 1.  Level 1 is the least complex maintenance and is carried out by 
the e
quipment user.  It is underpinned by equipment care which is a universal 
responsibility.  
b. Level 2.  Level 2 tasks require technical tradesmen and are more 
c
omplicated or time consuming.  
c. Levels 3 and 4.  Levels 3 and 4 involve complex equipment repair or overhaul 
b
y formation-level equipment support organisations or defence contractors.
Medical support
B.7. The principal task of the medical services is to maintain the fighting strength 
of the force by preventing disease and other non-battle injuries as well as tending to 
the sick and wounded.  Medical facilities in the land environment are categorised as 
follows.
a. Role 1.  Role 1 provides medical sections and unit aid posts.
b.
 Role 2 light manoeuvre.  Role 2 light manoeuvre facilities conduct triage and 
advanc
ed resuscitation procedures, up to damage control surgery.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)212
Logistics in the land environment
c. Role 2 enhanced.  Role 2 enhanced is role 2 light manoeuvre with a primary 
s
urgery capability added that includes surgical and medical intensive care assets 
and beds with nursing support.
d. Role 3.  Role 3 medical treatment facilities provide secondary care on 
op
erations to high clinical standards.
e. Role 4.  Role 4 medical facilities, usually in the strategic base, receive patients 
f
rom operations.  Such facilities also provide access to definitive and specialist 
care and rehabilitation.
Other sustainment functions
B.8. Sustaining the land environment also requires a broad range of other functions 
that are complementary to the three functional groupings above.  
a. Administrative support.  Administrative support encompasses the activities 
re
quired to manage the manpower of a deployed land force effectively.  
Activities include:
• personnel support;
• staff support;
• welfare support;
• budget and finance support; and
• civil and policy advice.
b. Infrastructure support.  Infrastructure support relates to providing 
and managing op
erational196 and indigenous infrastructure.  It includes 
infrastructure and engineering provided through:
• combat support engineering;
• force support engineering; and 
• military works areas.
c. Provost support.  Provost support includes policing the force and police 
s
upport to the force.  It includes:
• support to the Service Justice System;
• detention surety;
• close protection;
• arrest and detention operations;
196  Operational infrastructure is that which has been introduced into the theatre by the force.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 213
Logistics in the land environment
• recovering and recording evidence;
• information gathering; and
• mentoring and monitoring indigenous police forces and detaining 
authorities.
B.9. Land logistics is delivered from a variety of military and civilian sources.  In 
the land environment, the whole force approach includes the total support force.  
The total support force comprises a pre-planned mix of military, Civil Service and 
contracted197 personnel and capabilities held at readiness to provide progressive 
levels of support in the strategic base and on operations.198 
Land logistic framework
B.10. The deployed land logistic framework will always be driven by the particular 
needs of the operation, rather than by applying rigid templates.  The framework 
will be formed around a number of logistic nodes and, where appropriate, the 
infrastructure from where logistic support is provided.  The quantity and dispersion 
of those nodes should be determined by balancing the force’s logistic support needs 
against the associated force protection requirement.
B.1 1. The land logistic framework balances the need for efficiency and economy 
with the need for agility and resilience.  The structure will reflect the needs of the 
operation, using options for a ‘hub and spoke’ logistic network (often suited to more 
stable, enduring operations) or a more fluid echelon system.  
B.12. Support to the force is generally, but not always, split between joint and land 
organisations, with the latter usually being one of the logistic brigades.  In the 
example shown in Figure B.2, a deployed joint logistic command and control node 
is responsible for the joint supply area whilst a logistic brigade is responsible for 
sustainment forward of the Division’s rear boundary.  In Figure B.3, responsibility for 
sustaining the whole force lies with a joint logistic command and control node with 
land logistic capabilities under command.
197  Including contractor support to operations.
198  For more detail, in the context of the joint force, see Chapter 5, Section 2.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)214
Logistics in the land environment
Figure B.2 – Illustrative land logistic framework for a NATO Corps operation
XXXXXX
FLOT
XX XX
X
X
XXXXXX
Allied Rapid Reaction Corps
3(UK) Division
Armoured Infantry Brigade
Air Assault Brigade
Joint Force Logistic Component
Alternatively 104 Log Bde as the VANGUARD 
Enabling Group
101 Logistic Brigade
Also the VANGUARD Support Brigade
Force Logistic Regiment
Theatre Logistic Regiment
Close Support Logistic Regiment
Air Assault Support Regiment
Port and Maritime Regiment 
(elements)
Transport Squadron
Postal, Courier and Movement 
Squadron
Legend
APOD
JSA
SPOD
ARRC
ARRC
17
(-)
17
(-)
2MT
2MT
Fd FS
Hosp (A2)
Fd Hosp (Main)
29
(-)
29
(-)
FLR
FLR
JFLogC
JFLogC
MN
TLR x3
TLR
FS
MED
CSLR
BSG
Fd Hosp (Fwd)
CSLR
CS
BSG
FSG
Fd Hosp (Fwd)
CSLR
CSLR
CS
Sp
Sp
3(UK)
101
101
3(UK)
AA
(-)
AA
Force Support Battalion
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
Force Support Field Company
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
Armoured Close Support Battalion
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
Air Assault Battalion
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers
Field Hospital
Field Hospital (Main)
Field Hospital (Forward)
Armoured Medical Regiment
Joint supply area
Forward Support Group
Brigade Support Group
JSA
FSG
BSG
Fd FS
FS
Fd Hosp (Fwd)
Fd Hosp (Main)
Fd Hosp
CS
AA
Air port of disembarkationAPOD
SPOD Sea port of disembarkation

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 215
Logistics in the land environment
Figure B.3 – Illustrative land logistic framework for a UK enduring s tabilisation operation
RSG/JSA
JSA
RSG
BSG
BSG
 Joint Task Force Headquarters
Headquarters Joint Force Support
Theatre Logistic Regiment
Port Task Group
Theatre Logistic Regiment
Transport Squadron
Theatre Logistic Regiment
Medical Regiment
Field Hospital
Air port of disembarkation
Force Support Field Company 
Royal Electrical and Mechanical 
Engineers
Close Support Logistic Regiment
Armoured Close Support Battalion 
Royal Electrical and Mechanical 
Engineers
Armoured Medical Regiment
Battlegroup A2 Echelons
Armoured Infantry Battlegroup
Armoured Infantry Brigade
Rear Support Group
Joint supply area
Brigade Support Group
Sea port of disembarkation
Postal Courier and Movement Squadron
Theatre Logistic Regiment
Supply Squadron
Theatre Logistic Regiment
Fuel and General Transport Squadron
Theatre Logistic Regiment
APOD
SPOD
APOD
SPOD
Fd Hosp
Fd Hosp
JTFHQ
JTFHQ
SUP TLR
SUP TLR
TPT TLR
TPT TLR
CSLR
GS CSLR
F&GT TLR
F&GT TLR
TLR
TLR
PCM TLR
PTG TLR
CSLR
CS CSLR
CS CSLR
CS
CS
Fd Hosp
A2
A2
Tac Base
Tac Base
MOB
JFSp
JFSp
Legend

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)216
Logistics in the land environment
Army logistic formations
B.13. The logistic brigade is the Army’s primary means of sustaining the deployed 
land component and conducting support operations on behalf of the Land 
Component Commander.  The logistic brigade undertakes supply and distribution 
functions as well as providing logistic support services and specialist capabilities.  
Depending on the logistic framework design, the logistic brigade may also have joint 
or multinational logistic responsibilities.  The brigade headquarters may form the core 
of a joint logistic command and control node.  
B.14. Army logistics at formation level is delivered by three brigades.  These also 
provide a force preparation/force generating headquarters and a tactical, deployable 
headquarters capable of force and formation-level sustainment planning, manoeuvre 
and execution.  
B.15. 101 Logistic Brigade.  101 Logistic Brigade is assigned to support 3 (UK) Division.  
It i
s a high readiness formation in its designated operational role as the Vanguard199 
Support Brigade.  The Vanguard Support Brigade provides formation and force-level 
support to a land or joint force operating in the land environment.  The Vanguard 
Support Brigade is able to support smaller scale operations by detaching elements, 
or forming groupings, to support discrete activities.  Whilst operating in an integrated 
theatre, the Vanguard Support Brigade is able to support:
• the full range of Vanguard Division tactical actions;
• framework security;
• security sector reform;
• military capacity building; and 
• activities to deliver essential services, governance, economic development 
and reconstruction.  
The Vanguard Support Brigade is capable of operating in a joint, multinational and 
inter-agency context.  It can also deploy and operate independently for certain 
missions and theatres (for example, to conduct humanitarian relief).
B.16. 102 Logistic Brigade.  102 Logistic Brigade is assigned to support 1(UK) Division.  
It
s role is to conduct subsequent roulements of an enduring operation (for example, 
following-on from 101 Logistic Brigade as the Vanguard Support Brigade) or to 
provide support to concurrent commitments.  The Brigade is held at lower readiness 
than 101 Logistic Brigade which allows it to align itself better for more specific 
commitments. 
199  The Army holds a wide range of specified forces at readiness, from specialist teams and field 
hospitals up to a deployable division.  These forces at readiness are collectively referred to as the 
Vanguard.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 217
Logistics in the land environment
B.17. 104 Logistic Support Brigade.  104 Logistic Support Brigade provides a range 
of sp
ecialist mounting, enabling and movement support functions held at a range 
of readiness to provide a variety of capabilities to both the land environment and 
wider Defence.  One of its key roles is to provide the Vanguard Enabling Group which, 
although able to provide joint enabling functions, is primarily drawn from the Army.  
The Vanguard Enabling Group provides deployed enabling support200 to vanguard 
forces as well as to the Joint Expeditionary Force and forces from the other Services 
(such as the Lead Commando Group).  It is a mission-tailored organisation whose role 
is to set the conditions for establishing and sustaining a deployed force by providing 
the full spectrum of enabling and supporting activities.  The Vanguard Enabling 
Group can fulfil the following functions.
a. Opening the theatre.  The Vanguard Enabling Group will deploy capabilities 
b
efore the main force to set up the enabling framework of facilities and 
infrastructure.  In a joint operation, the Vanguard Enabling Group will be 
under the command and control of the deployed joint logistic command and 
control node.  The Group may, however, be required to form that joint logistic 
headquarters itself but would be likely to handover that enabling role to an 
enduring joint logistic headquarters to recuperate for further tasking.
b. Activating the theatre.  The Vanguard Enabling Group may activate the 
D
efence Support Chain and operate a joint supply area as well as enabling 
reception, staging, onward movement and integration201 for the deployed force.
c. Providing force support.  The Vanguard Enabling Group may provide 
s
upporting functions to the land or joint force, as appropriate to the operational 
circumstances, throughout the operation.  However, the Vanguard Enabling 
Group is likely to handover these supporting functions to an enduring force 
support organisation (for example the Vanguard Support Brigade).  In the latter 
case, the Vanguard Enabling Group would redeploy to the strategic base to 
recuperate for further tasking. 
d. Supporting redeployment.  The Vanguard Enabling Group will provide 
enabling for
ce elements, as required, to support the redeployment operation.
Other elements of 104 Logistic Support Brigade will conduct force mounting and 
Defence Support Chain opening tasks in the strategic base.  These may include 
some functions that enable the Purple Gate and provide sea and/or air mounting for 
deploying forces.  Capabilities in the strategic base will be provided by a 
non-deploying element drawn from the wider army.
200  Also referred to as ‘far-bank’ enabling support.
201  Integration is undertaken by the receiving force, however, the Vanguard Enabling Group will have 
responsibilities for establishing the reception, staging, onward movement and integration infrastructure.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
B
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)218
Logistics in the land environment
Further detail on logistics in the land environment can be found in:
• AC 71940 Army Doctrine Publication, Operations, Chapter 9.
• Army/ADOC/04_02, The Army Readiness Order.
• Army Headquarters Handbook 2014.
• AC 71877 Battlefield Equipment Support Doctrine, Issue 2.
• RLC Tactical Logistic Support Handbook.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 219
C.1. Introduction.  This annex details the characteristics and structures of air logistics 
tha
t are unique to the air environment.  Agility (scalability, incremental deployment 
of capabilities and reachback) and host-nation support (including requirements for 
access, basing and overflight) are particularly pertinent to the air environment.
C.2. Agility.  Air power’s agility stems from a blend of responsiveness and 
adapt
ability, enhanced by multi-role, multi-mission and swing-role capabilities.202  
Agile logistics is a fundamental pre-requisite to match the requirement to work 
with frequently small, often high value, assets which depend on rapid repair loops 
to meet critical timelines.203  Also, coordination across a range of logistic support 
arrangements is vital, given the increasing diversity of contracted support across 
Defence.
C.3. Headquarters Air Command planning and operational tasking.  Within 
H
eadquarters Air Command (Headquarters Air), the Contingency Action Group (CAG) 
is responsible for converting the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) statement of 
requirement into deployed RAF force elements, including Expeditionary Air Wings 
(EAW) and Expeditionary Air Groups (EAG).  For deliberately planned operations, A5-
Plans will lead the planning process and chair the CAG.  The CAG will draw on staff 
from:
• the A1-A9 divisions;
• role offices with logistic responsibilities for commodities or specific 
capabilities;
• the Group headquarters responsibl e for providing the force elements;
• Joint Force Air Component Headquarters; and
• subject matter experts.
Figure C.1 (overleaf)shows its structure.  
202  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-30, UK Air and Space Doctrine.
203  This is one of the drivers for priming equipment packs, which provide up to ten days of Class 2 
spares for operational activity, until resupply can be established (paragraph C.18).
Annex C – Logistics in the 
air environment
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)220
Figure C.1 – Contingency Action Group
C.4. Logistics within the Contingency Action Group.  There is a permanent logistic 
s
ubject matter expert presence within A5 to make sure logistic planning factors are 
considered early.  As planning for a deliberate operation approaches the execution 
phase, ownership of both the operational plan and the CAG process passes to A3-
Operations.  All contingency operations are led by A3 through the CAG process.  The 
CAG will determine the broad composition of the air contribution to an operation and 
provide guidance to A4-Operations’ Logistic Support Centre (as shown in Figure C.2) 
for the subsequent:
• scoping; 
• tasking;
• mounting;
• sustainment; and
• redeployment of the air component’s contribution.
C.5. Expeditionary Air Wing.  EAW were created to provide readily identifiable 
s
tructures, improving the ability to deploy discrete units of air power as a functioning 
formation.  Most RAF deployments should be based upon deploying an EAW 
construct; there are four principal benefits.
HQ Air
Groups
JFACC
DOB Cdr
Contingency Action Group
(CAG)
A1
Admin
Medical
A3
Ops
FP/Sy
Infra/RE
A5
Plans
A7
Doctrine
training
A9
Legal
A2
Intel
A4
Logs
A6
CIS
A8
Finance
Legend
Admin Administration
CIS Communications and information 
                     systems
DOB Cdr Deployment operating base commander
FP/Sy Force protection/security
HQ Headquarters 
Infra/RE Infrastructure/Royal Engineers
Intel Intelligence
JFACC Joint Force Air Component 
                     Commander
Logs Logistics
Ops Operations
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 221
• Delivering a more focused operational effect from the outset of any 
deployment – enabling more effective support.
• A more cohesively trained body of manpower.
• A broader understanding of air power capability and how it is delivered.
• A more inclusive formation identity at home and on deployed operations, 
improving ethos and esprit de corps.
C.6. Expeditionary Air Group/Air Component Headquarters.  To provide a unified 
s
tructure for conducting operations, RAF force elements deploy within an air 
component headquarters or EAG construct, with subordinate EAWs.  A single 
headquarters or EAG deploys for each theatre of operation, with the senior RAF officer 
as its commander.204  An EAW, or elements of, deploys to each deployment operating 
base with command and enabling elements tailored to the operational complexity, 
role and location.  For larger scale operations, an EAG may be deployed with the 
capability to coordinate theatre air logistic assets with other components on behalf of 
the Joint Force Air Component Commander.
204  As the Joint Force Air Component Commander or UK Air Component Commander.
Legend
Ops      Operations
SO1 Staff Officer Grade 1 (OF4)
SO2 Staff Officer Grade 2 (OF3)
SO3 Staff Officer Grade 3 (OF2)
Logistic Support Centre
SO1 A4 Ops
A4 Ops
Admin
SO2 A4 Ops
SO3 A4 Ops
(Deployment 
plans B)
SO2 A4 Ops
(Deployment 
plans)
SO2 A4 Ops
(Sustainment 
plans)
SO3 A4 Ops
(Sustainment) 
A
SO3 A4 Ops
(Mounting)
SO3 A4 Ops
(Deployment 
plans A)
SO3 A4 Ops
(Sustainment) 
B
A4 Ops
Team
SO2 A4 Ops
(Mounting and sustainment) 
Figure C.2 – A4 Operations Logistic Support Centre
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)222
C.7 . Expeditionary Air Wing deployment.  Main operating base elements that may 
deplo
y as EAW elements comprise those personnel and equipment modules needed 
to support a deployment operating base:
• command, control, coordina tion and communication; and
• logistic, administrative and infrastructure support.
Force elements at readiness and lodger units deploy separately to the EAW 
generation process.  When an EAW deploys, the residual main operating base 
operational capability is determined by the base’s commander.
C.8. Expeditionary Air Wing independence.  The air CAG nominates and generates 
the E
AW best able to support the operation.  This approach means that an EAW 
may be selected that is not necessarily the most recently trained EAW, nor the EAW 
associated with a deploying force element’s home base.  Force elements, air combat 
support units and air combat service support units are organised, deploy and operate 
independently to the EAW, to prevent stove-piping of scarce or unique capabilities.  
EAW provide the support infrastructure for those elements.  The elements are 
effectively lodger units at the EAW-enabled air port of disembarkation or deployment 
operating base.
C.9. Expeditionary Air Wing generation.  Headquarters Air generates EAW that 
are deplo
yable at very high and high readiness.  They are based on existing main 
operating base personnel and structures.  The specific task organisation for an 
operational deployment is driven by the Headquarters Air estimate process which 
optimises the deployed footprint while maximising reachback.  Figure C.3 illustrates 
EAW constructs.
C.10. Operational establishment table.  When an EAW is activated, Headquarters 
Air w
orks with the EAW and force elements to produce an operation establishment 
table205 that meets the operational requirement.  EAW command teams are to be at 
a readiness to match operational requirements and training realities, and comprise 
a permanent cadre of around 25-45 posts.206  At least one command team is to be 
available at any time.  
205  The Modularised Support Force-packaging Information Technology (MSFITS) is the system that 
currently supports this process.  MSFITS will be replaced by the NATO LOGFAS/LOGFS system in due 
course which is described in more detail in Chapter 2. 
206  To illustrate, as at 31 October 2013, 901 Expeditionary Air Wing (EAW) was commanded by a 
Group Captain who doubled as the Deputy Air Component Commander and was co-located with 83 
Expeditionary Air Group (EAG) headquarters.  The EAW was split into A, B and C flights, each commanded 
by squadron leaders.  A Flight was under the command of an engineering operations officer.  901 EAW B 
Flight was commanded by a logistics officer.  That, in turn, was divided into three sections commanded 
by a flight lieutenant flight operations officer, flight lieutenant logistics officer and a detachment warrant 
officer.
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 223
C.1 1. Force element table.  A representative template for the Air for ce element table is 
set by the EAW working group as planning for the operation matures.  
C.12. Theatre enabling.  Once A4-Operations staff have received planning guidance 
f
rom the CAG, they use the Modularised Support Force-packaging Information 
Technology System (MSFITS) to scope and task support packages to enable and 
sustain the deployment operating bases and air ports of disembarkation from which 
the EAW or EAG will operate.  This includes any:
• staging airfields;
• forward mounting bases; and
• support areas needed for the deployment.
The Joint Force Air Component Commander’s preliminary aim is to achieve an initial 
operating capability at each location.  Air operations may then commence, followed 
by incremental enhancements in capability to reach full operating capability.  Full 
operating capacity is the point from which deployed force elements receive full first 
and second line support.  Reachback and host-nation support is fully exploited.
C.13. Deployed air logistic command and control.  A4 personnel within the Air 
C
omponent Support division of the Joint Force Air Component headquarters deploy 
C2
FE@R MOB
Sp
Lodger units
UK MOB EAW on
activation
C2
DOB/
APOD
Sp
ACSUs/ACSSUs
FE@R
EAW
EAW
Legend
ACSSU Air combat service support units
ACSU Air combat support units
APOD Air port of disembarkation
C2 Command and control
DOB Deployment operating base
EAW Expeditionary air wing
FE@R Force elements at readiness
MOB Main operating base
Sp Support
Figure C.3 – UK and deployed Expeditionary Air Wing constructs 
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)224
to provide logistic direction.  This includes subject matter expert support to all air 
component force elements during the deployment, sustainment and recovery phases 
of more complex operations.  The deployment from the Air Component Support 
division also provides the logistic interface with other deployed components.  For 
simpler operations, if a Joint Force Air Component headquarters has not deployed, 
the senior logistics officer deployed with the EAW implements A4 staff direction 
and leads on air logistic issues and priorities.  Other functions that may require 
representation in the Air Component Support division include:
• medical;
• engineering;
• personnel support; and
• infrastructure.
However, for operations with greater span of control requirements, an EAG may be 
deployed to coordinate theatre air logistic assets with other components, on behalf of 
the Joint Force Air Component Commander.
C.14. Air combat support units.  Air combat support units are A3 force elements 
which pro
vide operations support and force protection to the primary air component 
force elements.  Operations support air combat support units may include:
• the Mobile Meteorological Unit;
• in-theatre air traffic controller s and battle space managers; and
• the Tactical Imagery/Intelligence Wing.
Force protection air combat support units may include:
• RAF Force Protection Wing headquarters;
• RAF Regiment field squadrons; and
• 3 (Tactical) Police Wing.
C.15. Air combat service support units.  Air combat service support units (ACSSU) 
pro
vide the air component’s specialist deployable logistic support.  That support 
includes the key capabilities to enable deployed locations and also sustains those 
functions beyond the scope of EAWs.  Land capabilities may support ACSSU to 
provide functions such as:
• deployment operating base infrastructure;
• fuel;
• water; and
• postal and courier support.
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 225
Figure C.4 shows ACSSU and their roles.
ACSSU Role
No 85 (Expeditionary 
Logistics) Wing 
Deployable air logistic headquarters.
1 (Expeditionary 
Logistics) Squadron
Spearhead element of deployed supply organisation (supply 
control team, fi xed wing aviation fuel support, air/rail/port liaison 
team).
2 (Mechanical 
Transport) Squadron
Heavy lift surface transport capability that can operate on 
behalf of all environments.  Movement of materiel along intra-
theatre surface lines of communication between sea/air ports 
of disembarkation, joint operating bases, rear explosive storage 
areas and petroleum supply depots.
Joint Aircraft 
Recovery and 
Transport Squadron
Worldwide UK military aircraft recovery capability.
No 71 (Inspection 
and Repair) 
Squadron
Non-destructive testing and expedient repair.
No 93 (Expeditionary 
Armaments) 
Squadron 
Expeditionary air armament.
No 5001 
(Expeditionary 
Airfi eld Facilities) 
Squadron
Installation, maintenance and removal of airfi eld facilities 
for expeditionary operations.  Specifi cally: technical working 
environments, air separation units and portable aircraft arresting 
gear.
3 (Mobile Catering) 
Squadron
Deployable collective catering support and accommodation 
management.
No 5131 (Bomb 
Disposal) Squadron
Air operations explosive ordnance disposal.
90 Support Unit Communications and information systems and tactical air traffi   c 
control.
1 Air Movements 
Wing (1 AMW)
In the deployed space, 1AMW is a key enabler, providing 
continuous support to operations by facilitating the operational 
air bridge, providing the aerial port element of the theatre 
opening capability and maintaining a presence at each of the key 
air ports of disembarkation in theatre.
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)226
ACSSU Role
Tactical Medical 
Wing
Deployed medical support, including deployment operating base 
medical support and aeromedical evacuation and escorts.  Their 
task includes providing equipment to support FE@R 0-2:
Medical treatment facility role 1/role 1(5).
Medical treatment facility role 2(10)/role 2 (25).
Forward aeromedical evacuation and critical care air support 
teams (CCAST).
Tactical and strategic aeromedical evacuation and CCAST.
Deployed headquarters staff .
Deployed aeromedical command and control staff .
Tactical Supply Wing First and second line fuel support to Joint Helicopter Command 
rotary assets.
Figure C.4 – Air combat service support unit roles
C.16. Reachback.  Reachback is the most significant factor in providing logistic 
s
upport to deployed air combat force elements.  Reachback allows logistic planning 
staffs to achieve a reduced optimum logistic footprint in-theatre (underpinned by 
logistic advice to deployed staffs and timely materiel re-supply, from the home 
base).  Except for routine demands which are met automatically, joint operations 
area reachback requests are coordinated by air logistic staff within A4-Operations, 
respective Groups and commodity role offices.  Those staff input their priorities for 
movement through the Defence Support Chain to the theatre logistic command 
and control node.  That node liaises with Defence Support Chain Operations and 
Movements staff to achieve a coherent, prioritised theatre ‘pull’ that meets the overall 
operational plan.  Reachback support includes:
• specialist air engineering and other ad vice to deployed air force elements 
and the deployed logistic command chain;
• processing real-time demands for re-supply;
• coordinating provision of sustainment and additional capability 
requirements; and
• providing logistic planning support to the air component commander’s staff.
C.17 . Host-nation support.  Host-nation support provides supplies and service 
s
upport in, and en route to and from, the theatre of operations.  Air may seek the 
following types of host-nation support: 
• access facilities;
• basing facilities;
• overflight for both deployment and operations; and
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 227
• supply of materiel, medical assistance and security assistance. 
However, when deploying as part of a coalition, the UK force may need to compete 
for limited resources.  Host-nation bases may be described as:
• well-found – where the host nation provides mos t of the facilities and 
services;
• austere – where the host nation provides a s ignificant minority of the 
facilities and resources; or
• bare base – where the host nation provides none , or a relatively insignificant 
amount, of facilities and services.  
The levels of host-nation support significantly affect the scale and composition of the 
EAW at an air port of disembarkation or deployment operating base.
C.18. Priming equipment packs.  Sustainment of Class 2 materiel is achieved by 
pro
viding priming equipment packs for each deployed platform or capability.  
Priming equipment pack scaling is calculated to sustain operational activity for up to 
ten days until re-supply can be established.  The scaling assumes:
• no aircraft attrition;
• force protection measures are sufficient to secure strategic and in-theatre 
lines of communication; and
• air and surface re-supply is established from the start of an operation.
Based on these assumptions, priming equipment packs are normally predicated on 
a notional five-day transit time and five-day buffer stock.  Replenishment is provided 
through supply from the UK strategic base, contractor logistic support arrangements 
as far forward as possible, or deploying off-aircraft test and repair facilities in 
air-portable workshops and air-portable avionics workshops. 207
C.19. Contractor support to deployed force elements.  Providing logistic support to 
deplo
yed force elements increasingly integrates organic capability with that provided 
by:
• other Services individually;
• other Services jointly;
• other government departments;
207  Instead of priming equipment packs, Joint Helicopter Command supports its aircraft with deployed 
spares packs which are scaled for 15 days flying in the land environment and 28 days in the maritime.
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
C
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)228
• allies; and
• civilian partners.
The extent of partnered, or contractor logistic support, arrangements includes 
contractor support to operations, sponsored reserves and field service 
representatives providing logistic and maintenance support.208
C.20. Reverse supply chain.  A4-Operations staff monitor the reverse supply chain 
and pro
vide input to the theatre logistic command and control node, which manages 
the theatre end of the reverse supply chain.  The timely return of items subject to 
partnered support and contractor logistic support arrangements is particularly 
important.  Many contracts have a mandated return period which may attract 
contractual penalties.  If return timescales are not achieved, repair turn-round times 
may be extended and assets in theatre remain unserviceable for longer.
Further details on air logistics can be found in:
• Air Publication (AP) 100C-72 Air Operations Logistic Doctrine and the Air   
 Logistic Concept of Operations;209 and
• AP 100C-75 Royal Air Force Support for Operations.210
208 For more detail, in the context of the joint force, see Chapter 5, Section 2.
209 Under revision 2014/15.
210 Under revision 2014/15.
Logistics in the air environment

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 229
Defence Equipment and Support
D.1. The Defence Support Chain (DSC) is key to enabling all phases of an operation.  
Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S) staff, mainly from within the Inventory 
Management and Logistic Commodities and Services Operating Centres, contribute 
to developing the logistic estimate that informs the sustainability statement.211  
Industry providers must be involved at each stage of operational logistic planning to 
ensure full value is delivered coherently to the Defence Support Chain.212
D.2. DSC refers to the end-to-end process of the entire logistic support system and, 
in addition to DE&S, incorporates a broad range of stakeholders, including:
• Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ);
• industry;
• the Coupling Bridge213 providers;
• single-Service commands deployed in the joint operations area; 
• other nations;
• other government departments;
• non-governmental organisations; and
• host-nation support providers.
The DSC depends on effective and secure logistic information services, provided 
from the strategic base all the way forward to deployed force elements.  The DSC also 
needs to use agreed standardised procedures.  The strategic base encompasses all 
UK contributors (MOD, industry and contractors) and is a component of the Defence 
Support Network.214  The strategic base is a key enabler for achieving integrated 
logistics. 
211 Chapter 4 provides more detail on the sustainability statement.
212 Chapter 5 provides more detail on support from industry.
213 The Coupling Bridge is described in Chapter 6, Section 4.
214 The Defence Support Network is discussed at Chapter 1, Section 3.
Annex D – Defence 
Equipment and Support

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)230
Defence Equipment and Support
Organisational roles and responsibilities
Defence Support Chain delivery
D.3. The former Joint Support Chain Operating Centre has been restructured to form 
two operating centres, the:
• Inventory Management Operating Centre (IMOC); and
• Logistic Commodities and Services (LCS)215 operating centre.
Inventory Management Operating Centre
D.4. The IMOC is broken down into three core areas; Supply Chain Process, Supply 
Chain Information Services and Support Chain Engagement.  The IMOC is a customer-
facing organisation focusing on what the front line commands and other DE&S 
operating centres need.  The IMOC is currently building the professional ‘Inventory 
Management’ pillar across DE&S and will continue to raise standards of this capability 
to ensure the inventory meets Defence needs.  IMOC’s capability is provided by 
people, processes and supporting systems, tools and measures. 
D.5. Supply Chain Process.  Supply Chain Process is the lead authority for designing, 
deliv
ering and deploying fit-for-purpose support chain management policy, 
processes and procedures and delivering effective support chain specialist enabling 
services within DE&S.  The Supply Chain Process portfolio includes:
• integrated logistic support;
• inventory policy;
• material accounting;
• support chain and inventory modelling and analysis; and
• other inventory services. 
D.6. Supply Chain Information Services.  Supply Chain Information Services is 
res
ponsible for commissioning, through-life management and supporting logistic 
information services to support Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Logistic 
Operations) in the Senior Responsible Owner216 role for the Logistic Information 
Services programme.  This includes the support chain, engineering and managing 
information exchanges both within MOD and across MOD boundaries with industry 
215  Logistic Commodities and Services was formed from the existing Logistic Commodities, Provider 
Management and Joint Support Chain Services (British Forces Post Office and Disposals Services 
Authority) structures.
216  The Senior Responsible Owner is the individual responsible for ensuring that a programme meets 
its objectives and delivers the projected benefits.

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition) 231
Defence Equipment and Support
and other government departments.  Supply Chain Information Services achieves its 
mission through a strategic delivery partnership to deliver effective and efficient 
end-to-end logistic information services, which are fully integrated with industry.
D.7. Support Chain Engagement.  Head Support Chain Engagement delivers outputs 
t
o customers by deploying suitably qualified and experienced personnel (SQEP) across 
the DE&S domains to deliver IMOC products and services.  By deploying Support Chain 
Engagement SQEP in this manner, the organisation optimises required products’ and 
services’ delivery and also identifies any internal SQEP shortfalls, allowing management 
action to be taken.
Logistic Commodities and Services operating centre
D.8. The LCS operating centre provides a vital link in the Defence Support Chain 
and in the global supply and provision of commodities.  LCS is configured primarily 
as a provider organisation, taking Defence requirements and providing logistic 
commodities and services to meet prescribed Defence capabilities.  The LCS operating 
centre consists of two core areas, Logistic Commodities and Logistic Services. 
D.9. Logistic Commodities.  Logistic Commodities comprises a number of teams that 
are curren
tly responsible for procuring contracts for, and managing the inventory of, a 
range of services and products for the MOD.  These include:
• general commodities and supplies;
• Defence clothing; and
• medical supplies.
Logistic Commodities’ primary mission is to ensure that commodities and services are 
effectively and efficiently available to equip and support the Armed Forces, now and in 
the future.
D.10. Logistic Services.  Logistic Services provides a materiel storage, processing and 
di
stribution service within the Defence Support Chain to sustain the fighting power 
of our Armed Forces worldwide.  Logistic Services also includes the British Forces Post 
Office and the Disposal Services Authority.  It considers these three elements as a 
whole, optimising effective, efficient and common use of capabilities, people’s skill sets 
and MOD owned infrastructure.  Logistic Services:
• maximises opportunities to share best practice;
• plans on an integrated basis;
• consolidates functional support; and
• reduces duplicated effort. 

JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
D
JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)232
Defence Equipment and Support
Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements
D.1 1. Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM) provides the 
single operational focal point for coordinating DE&S support to plan, configure and 
execute the strategic deployment, sustainment and recovery of materiel.  DSCOM 
sits at the heart of the Defence Support Chain, delivering supply chain operations 
and movements support to operational and training theatres around the globe.  In 
doing so, it has very close relationships with MOD Head Office, PJHQ and the front 
line commands.  DSCOM is a three-pillar structure comprising Operations, Movements 
and Plans. 
D.12. DSCOM Operations.  DSCOM Operations provides an around-the-clock 
op
erational focus to coordinate and direct pan-DE&S support to operations, training 
and routine support world-wide.  The DSCOM Operations:
• coordinates the execution of the Defence Outload Plan and the Whole 
Fleet Management Breakout Plan, from the strategic base to the point(s) of 
embarkation;
• plans, executes and monitors the mo vement of deploying force elements 
and materiel across the Coupling Bridge;
• programmes and tasks UK military strategic air transport and surface assets 
(acquiring and tasking lift assets from the commercial sector or other nations 
to meet shortfalls); and
• provides the MOD focus for contractors on deployed operations mounting.
D.13. DSCOM Movements.  DSCOM Movements:
• 
ratifies the statement of movement requirement for passengers and freight 
movements supporting operations, training and routine support world-wide;
• provides a Defence passenger reservation service to optimise strategic air 
lines of communication capacity; and
• operates an around-the-clock compassionate movements cell.
D.14. DSCOM Plans.  DSCOM Plans:
• 
leads the DE&S input to strategic and operational level planning to support 
PJHQ-led current and contingent operations;
• provides oversight and visibility of al l urgent operational requirements being 
procured and delivered by DE&S; and
• seeks continual performance improvem ent opportunities to optimise how 
the Coupling Bridge is operated.

233JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
Lexicon
The Lexicon contains acronyms/abbreviations and terms/definitions used in this 
edition of Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 4-00 and is not intended to be exhaustive.  
Definitive and more comprehensive details are to be found in JDP 0-01.1, UK 
Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database, Allied Administrative Publication-06 
(AAP-06), NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions and AAP-15, NATO Glossary of 
Abbreviations, respectively.
Part 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
AAP  Allied Administrative Publication
APOD  air port of disembarkation
APOE  air port of embarkation
ACDS(Log Ops) Assistant Chief of Defence Staff (Logistic Operations)
ACO  Allied Command Operations
ACOS  Assistant Chief of Staff
ACSSU  air combat service support unit
AJP  Allied Joint Publication
ALP  Allied Logistic Publication
AMW  air movements wing
AO  auxiliary oiler
AOR  auxiliary oiler replenishment
AP  Air Publication
APP  Allied Procedural Publication  
ASSESSREP Assessment Report
BRd  Book of Reference (digital)
BWIMS  Base Warehouse Inventory Management System
C4I  command, control, communic ations, computers and information
CAG  Contingency Action Group
CB  Classified Book
CBRN  chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
CDM  Chief of Defence Materiel
CDS  Chief of Defence Staff 
CJEF  Combined Joint Expeditionary Force
CJO  Chief of Joint Operations

234 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
CJSG  Combined Joint Support Group
CJSG HQ Combined Joint Support Group Headquarters
CJSOR  Combined Joint Statement of Requirement
CLS  contractor logistic support
COA  course of action
COBRAT  Coupling Bridge Analysis Tool
CONDO  contractors on deployed operations
COPD  Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive
COSTR  capability, operations, standing tasks and recuperation
CSO  contractor support to operations
DCDC  Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
DCR  daily consumption rate
DE&S  Defence Equipment and Support
DEFCON  Defence condition
DI  deliberate intervention
DII  Defence Information Infrastructure
DOS  days of supply
DSC  Defence Support Chain
DSCOM  Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements 
Dstl  Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
EAG  Expeditionary Air Group
EAW  Expeditionary Air Wing
ECI  expeditionary camp infrastructure
EHR  extremely high readiness
ES  equipment support
EU  European Union
FE  force elements
FE@R  force elements at readiness
FE@S  force elements at sustainability
FMB  forward mounting base
FOMO  Fleet Operations and Maintenance Officer 
FP  force protection
FragO  fragmentary order
FRS  forward repair ship

235JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
GLC  Group Logistic Coordinator
GS  general service
HIC  high intensity combat
HR  high readiness
IMOC  Inventory Management Operating Centre
ITT  in-theatre training
JAMES  Joint Asset Management and Engineering Solutions
JDOA  joint desired order of arrival
JDOD  joint desired order of departure
JDP  Joint Doctrine Publication
JFC  Joint Force Commander
JFET  joint force element table
JFLogC  Joint Force Logistic Component
JFLogCHQ Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters
JLSG  Joint Logistic Support Group
JMC  Joint Mounting Cell
JSOR  Joint Statement of Requirement 
JSP  Joint Service Publication   
JTFC  Joint Task Force Commander
JTFHQ  Joint Task Force Headquarters
JTTP  Joint Tactics, Techniques and Procedures
JWP  Joint Warfare Publication
LAT  load allocation table
LCS  Logistic Commodities and Services
LEC  locally employed civilians
LOC  lines of communication
LOGFAS  Logistic Functional Area Services
LOGFS  Logistic Functional Services
LPH  landing platform helicopter
LR  low readiness                
LSD(A)  landing ship dock (auxiliary)

236 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
MJDI  Management of Joint Deployed Inventory 
MOD  Ministry of Defence
MR  medium readiness
MSFITS  Modularised Support Force-packaging Information Technology 
  S y s t e m
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
NC3A  NATO Consultation, Command and Control Agency
NSE  national support element
NSPA  NATO Support Agency
OET  operational establishment table
OGD  other government department
OLRT  operational liaison and reconnaissance team
OPDEF  operational defect
ORBAT  order of battle
OSCC  Operational Support Capability Contract
PAD  preferred arrival date
PCRF  primary casualty receiving facility
PE  peace enforcement
PJHQ  Permanent Joint Headquarters
PK  peacekeeping
POGO  proof of good order
PUS  Permanent Under Secretary
QASR  Quarterly Assessment of Sustainability Risk
QPRR  Quarterly Performance and Risk Report
RDD  required delivery date
RFA  Royal Fleet Auxiliary
RFA 96  Reserve Forces Act 1996
RFTG  Response Force Task Group
RM  Royal Marines
RN  Royal Navy
RSOM  reception, staging and onward movement
RSOI  reception, staging, onward movement and integration 

237JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
RTM  ready to move
SACEUR  Supreme Allied Commander Europe
SCPT  supply chain processing time
SDSR  Strategic Defence and Security Review
SFA  Strategic Fuels Authority
SHAPE  Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe
SPC  standard priority code
SPOD  sea port of disembarkation
SPOE  sea port of embarkation
SPS  standard priority system
SQEP  suitably qualified and experienced personnel
SS  steady-state
SUSTAT  sustainability statement
UK  United Kingdom
UOR  urgent operational requirement
   
VHR  very high readiness
VLR  very low readiness
WIA  wounded in action

238 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
Part 2 – Terms and definitions
administration
The provision and implementation of regula tions and procedures related to the 
management of an organization in support of the accomplishment of its mission.  
(AAP-06)
area of operations
An operational area defined by a joint commander for land or maritime forces to 
c
onduct military activities.  Normally, an area of operations does not encompass the 
entire joint operations area of the joint commander but is sufficient in size for the 
joint force component commander to accomplish assigned missions and protect 
forces.  (AAP-06) 
asset tracking
Generic term used in industry to refer to the track ing of assets in the supply chain.  
Within NATO, the capability to maintain visibility of a specific asset, normally serially 
numbered or otherwise uniquely identified, throughout the support chain.  
(JDP 4-00)
civil-military cooperation
The coordination and cooperation, in supp ort of the mission, between the NATO 
Commander and civil actors, including the national population and local authorities, 
as well as international, national and non-governmental organisations and agencies.  
(AAP-06)
combat service support
The support provided to combat forces, primarily in the f ields of administration and 
logistics.  (AAP-06)
consignment tracking
Consignment tracking is the process of providing vi sibility of materiel as it is moved 
through the Defence Support Chain.  (JSP 886)
contracting for availability
A contract where industry is incentivised to provide a specified level of equipment 
a
vailability.  (JSP 886)
contracting for capability
A contract where industry is incentivised t o deliver MOD-specified capability in the 
most cost effective manner.  (JSP 886)

239JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
contractor logistic support (CLS)
Contractor logistic support is a range of support options that involves the transfer of 
resp
onsibilities for delivering an agreed level of equipment availability to a contractor.  
(JSP 886)
contractors on deployed operations (CONDO)
Contractors on deployed operations encompasses contractor logistic support, where 
in
-service equipment is maintained under contract with the equipment provider, and 
the use of contractors on operations engaged through the PJHQ Operational Support 
Capability Contract.  (JDP 0-01.1; proposed modification)
contractor support to operations (CSO)
Contractor support to operations encompasses all support provided to UK military 
op
erations by non-regular forces.  It includes sponsored reserves, contractors on 
deployed operations and private military and security companies.  (JSP 567) 
Coupling Bridge
The series of activities through which for ce elements, equipment and materiel 
are delivered from the strategic base to the joint operations area, and returned, in 
accordance with the Joint Task Force Commander’s priorities.  It extends from air and 
sea ports of embarkation to air and sea ports of disembarkation and includes all the 
strategic assets, infrastructure and facilities required.  (JDP 0-01.1)
daily consumption rate (DCR)
A unit or quan
tity of supplies estimated to be the average consumed within a 24 hour 
period for a specified activity.  (AC 71845)
days of supply (DOS)
A calculated quantity of combat supplies each formation can be expected to consume 
on a daily b
asis, dependent upon the theatre of operations..  (JDP 0-01.1)
Defence Industrial Strategy
The Defence Industrial Strategy promotes a s ustainable industrial base that retains 
in the UK those industrial capabilities, including infrastructure, skills, knowledge and 
capacity, needed to ensure the appropriate level of industrial support for Defence.  
(JDP 0-01.1)  
Defence Support Chain (DSC)
The Defence Support Chain encompasses the end-to-end process of the entire 
lo
gistic support system, including stakeholders beyond MOD and UK.  (JDP 4-00)

240 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements (DSCOM)  
D
efence Support Chain Operations and Movements provides the operations focus 
for Defence Equipment and Support by coordinating movement support activity to 
operational and training theatres around the globe.  (JDP 4-00)
Defence Support Network
A flexible set of supply chains connecting p oints of production and use, ensuring the 
most appropriate and efficient use of resources across the Whole Force, maximising 
information and technology to assure logistic support to operational commanders.  
(JDP 4-00) 
deployment operating base
A base, other than the peacetime base, having minimum essen tial operational and 
support facilities, to which a unit or part of a unit will deploy to operate from in time 
of tension or war.  (AAP-06)
Detailed Deployment Plan
The plan encompasses all orders and direction s that allocate strategic lift assets and 
detail the embarkation of personnel and cargoes to mount an operation.  (JDP 0-01.1)
equipment
All non-expendable items needed to outfit / equip an individual or organisation.  
(AAP-06)
force generation
The process of providing suitably trained and e quipped forces, and their means of 
deployment, recovery and sustainment to meet all current and potential future tasks, 
within required readiness and preparation times.  (JDP 0-01.1)
force protection (FP)
The coordinated measures by which threats and hazards to the joint force are 
c
ountered and mitigated in order to maintain an operating environment that enables 
the Joint Commander the freedom to employ joint action.  (JDP 0-01.1)  
forward mounting base (FMB)
A b
ase (also deployment operating base) established within the operational area 
to support tactical operations at forward operating bases.  It will be resourced to a 
greater level than a forward operating base, including command and control, logistics 
and administrative support elements.  (JDP 4-00)

241JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
host nation
A nation which, by agreement:
• 
receives forces and materiel of NATO or other nations operating on/from or 
transiting through its territory;
• allows materiel and/or NATO organisations to be located on its territory; and/
or
• provides support for these purposes.  (AAP-06)
host-nation support
Civil and military assistance rendered in peace, crisis or war by a host nation to NATO 
and
/or other forces and NATO organisations which are located on, operating on/from, 
or in transit through the host nation’s territory.  (AAP-06)
host-nation support arrangements
Those documents which detail the support, p olitical, legal and/or financial 
arrangements agreed upon by national and NATO authorities and which are 
necessary to provide host-nation support to operations and exercises. 
(AJP-4.5(B)/ NATO MC 334/2)
in-country resources
Resources provided to a force from the non-governmental infrastructure of a country.  
(J
DP 0-01.1)
infrastructure
The static buildings, facilities and other permanent installations required to support 
milit
ary capabilities.  (AAP-06)
interoperability
The ability to act together coherently, effec tively and efficiently to achieve Allied 
tactical, operational and strategic objectives.  (AAP-06)
Joint Force Logistic Component (JFLogC)
The Joint Force Logistic Component provides a single joint focus for all theatre-
lo
gistic activity in support of a deployed joint force and its headquarters commands 
the theatre end of the Coupling Bridge.  It has particular responsibility for the 
reception, staging and onward movement of force elements in the joint operations 
area and the sustainment of the operation.  It ensures that force elements and 
sustainment stocks arrive in theatre in accordance with the Joint Task Force 
Commander’s priorities and are deployed to components as required.  
(JDP 0-01.1; proposed modification)

242 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
joint logistic enablers
Those force elements and capabilities that deliv er the joint logistic effects necessary 
for: the successful mounting, deployment, reception, staging and onward movement 
and integration of a force; the sustainment, recovery and redeployment of a force 
across the Coupling Bridge and within theatre; and the opening, operation and 
closing of ports of disembarkation/embarkation.  (JDP 4-00; proposed addition)
joint operations area
An area of land, sea and airspace, in which a designated Joint Task Force Commander 
plan
s and conducts military operations to accomplish a specific mission.  A 
joint operations area including its defining parameters, such as time, scope and 
geographic area, is contingency/mission specific.  (JDP 0-01.1)
joint sea basing
Use of the sea as a base within joint operations in order to contribute to an optimum 
fo
otprint ashore.  (JDP 0-01.1)
lead Service
Analogous to logistic lead nation, it is where a Service undertakes the procurement 
and pro
vision of a range of materiel and services for the benefit of all, e.g. fuel, rations, 
common user equipment.  (JDP 4-00)
lines of communication (LOC)
All the land, water, and air routes that conne ct an operating military force with one or 
more bases of operations, and along which supplies and reinforcements move.  
(AAP-06)
logistic efficiency
The achievement of the maximum level of support for the least logistic effort, 
mak
ing the most efficient use of finite resources, transportation assets and lines of 
communication.  
Note:  Logistic efficiency ultimately determines the most appropriate organisational 
structures and necessary resources to support an operation, in some cases employing 
alternative, possibly non-military, support arrangements.  (JDP 0-01.1)  
logistic footprint
The impact of logistic activity in the joint opera tions area.  It identifies the utilisation 
of real estate and the consumption of resources, including manpower, equipment, 
infrastructure, supplies and host-nation support that logistic activity in support of an 
operation will require.
Note: It includes those resources that are deployed along lines of communication, 
where they are required for logistic activity, and any liability for additional force 
protection assets.  (JDP 0-01.1)

243JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
logistic functional control
The authority to direct the method and processes employed to conduct logistic 
f
unctions in order to ensure commonality and efficient use of resources.  (JDP 0-01.1)
logistic information management
A discipline that directs and supports the handling of lo gistic information (knowledge 
such as facts, data or opinions) throughout its life-cycle, ensuring it becomes the right 
information in the right form and of adequate quality to satisfy the demands of an 
organisation.  
(NATO MC 319/3; NATO Military Committee agreed, North Atlantic Council pending)
logistic lead nation
A nation that assumes overall responsibilit y for organizing and coordinating an 
agreed broad spectrum of logistic support for all or part of a multinational force, 
including headquarters, within a defined geographical area for a defined period.  
(NATO MC 319/3; NATO Military Committee agreed, North Atlantic Council pending)
logistic planning team
A PJHQ J1/J4 team that is formed at the outset of planning and meets as necessary 
either ph
ysically, through video teleconferencing or virtually.  
Note: It acts as the vehicle for coordinating all logistic planning activity for 
contingencies or operations, depending on the scale of the operation.  (JDP 0-01.1)
logistic role specialist nation
A nation that assumes the responsibility for providing or procuring a specific logistic 
cap
ability and/or service for all or part of the multinational force within a defined 
geographical area for a defined period.  
(NATO MC 319/3; NATO Military Committee agreed, North Atlantic Council pending)
logistics
The science of planning and carrying out the mo vement and maintenance of forces.  
In its most comprehensive sense, the aspects of military operations which deal with:
• design and development, acquisition, storage, movement, distribution, 
maintenance, evacuation and disposal of materiel;
• transport of personnel;
• acquisition or construction, maintenance, operation and disposition of 
facilities;
• acquisition or furnishing of services; and
• medical and health service support.
Note: Though it is included in the ratified NATO definition of logistics, Belgium, Czech 
Republic, Germany, Hungary, Slovakia and the United States do not consider medical 
and health service support to be a logistic function.  (AAP-06/NATO MC 319/3)

244 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
logistic sustainment
The process and mechanism by which sustainabilit y is achieved and which consists 
of supplying a force with consumables and replacing combat losses and non-combat 
attrition of equipment in order to maintain the force’s combat power for the duration 
required to meet its objectives.  (AAP-06)
maintenance
All actions taken to retain equipment in or to restore it to specified conditions 
un
til the end of its use, including inspection, testing, servicing, modification(s), 
classification as to serviceability, repair, recovery, rebuilding, reclamation, salvage and 
cannibalisation.  (AAP-06)
materiel
The stores and equipment (as opposed to per sonnel) available or required for an 
undertaking.  (JDP 4-00)
memorandum of understanding
A written overarching bilateral or multilateral agre ed document which implies an 
intent or responsibility to support allied forces and organisations.  (JDP 0-01.1)
mounting
All preparations made in areas designated for the purp ose, in anticipation of 
an operation.  It includes the assembly in the mounting area, preparation, and 
maintenance within the mounting area, movement to loading points, and subsequent 
embarkation into ships, craft, or aircraft if applicable.  (AAP-06)
movement 
T
he activity involved in the change in location of forces, equipment, personnel and 
stocks as part of a military operation.  Movement requires the supporting capabilities 
of mobility, transportation, infrastructure, movement control and support functions.  
(NATO MC 319/3; NATO Military Committee agreed, North Atlantic Council pending)
multinational integrated logistic unit
A Unit formed by two or more nations which agre e, under the operational control of 
a force commander at joint force or component level, to provide logistic support to a 
multinational force.  
(NATO MC 319/3; NATO Military Committee agreed, North Atlantic Council pending)

245JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
national support element (NSE)
A national support element provides the national logistic focus to a joint commander 
within a multina
tional operation.  It delivers a logistic coordination and liaison 
function between that nation’s forces, other deployed coalition forces and the Joint 
Commander.  National support elements draw their operational control from national 
authorities.  (JDP 0-01.1; proposed modification)
onward movement
The process of moving units, personnel and ma teriel from the reception area, or 
staging areas if required, to their operational deployment location.
Note: Onward movement may be to any of the components, including to vessels at 
sea and may utilise military, host-nation support or locally hired transport assets.  
(JDP 0-01.1)  
operational command
The authority granted to a commander to assign missions or tasks to subordinate 
c
ommanders, to deploy units, to reassign forces, and to retain or delegate operational 
and/or tactical control as the commander deems necessary.
Note: It does not include responsibility for administration.  (AAP-06)
operational control
The authority delegated to a commander to dire ct forces assigned so that the 
commander may accomplish specific missions or tasks which are usually limited by 
function, time or location; to deploy units concerned, and to retain or assign tactical 
control of those units.  It does not include authority to assign separate employment of 
components of the units concerned.  Neither does it, of itself, include administrative 
or logistic control.  (AAP-06)
operations security
The process which gives a military operation or e xercise appropriate security, using 
passive or active means to deny the enemy knowledge of the dispositions, capabilities 
and intentions of friendly forces.  (AAP-06)
pre-position
To place military units, equipment or supplies a t or near the point of planned use or 
at a designated location to reduce reaction time, and to ensure timely support of a 
specific force during initial phases of an operation.  (AAP-06)
Purple Gate
The single point of entry into the Defence Support Chain to ensure the regulation 
of ma
teriel flow into the Defence Support Chain for the sustainment of operational 
theatres.  (JDP 0-01.1)

246 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
readiness 
T
he period of time measured from an initiation order to the moment when the 
headquarters or unit is ready to perform its task from its peacetime location 
(permanent or forward deployed) or ready for deployment.  (MC 317/1)
reception
The process of receiving, offloading, mar shalling and transporting personnel and 
materiel from strategic or operational lift through sea, air or land transportation 
ports of disembarkation.  It involves the preparation of facilities, initial administration 
and briefing of personnel and their subsequent transport away from the point of 
disembarkation.  (JDP 0-01.1)  
reception, staging and onward movement (RSOM)
The intra-theatre deployment phase in which unit s, personnel and materiel arriving in 
a secured joint operations area are transferred from a port of disembarkation to their 
final destination on the commander’s required date.  
Note: During reception, staging and onward movement the deployed joint logistic 
headquarters will be the supported commander.  (NATO Terminology Database)
reception, staging, onward movement and integration (RSOI)
The series of activities that enable force elemen ts, on arrival in theatre, to attain full 
operating capability as part of a joint force.  Integration is the synchronised transfer of 
operationally-ready units and contracted capabilities into the joint force. 
Note: The integration process will be J3-led and conducted within components; the 
deployed logistic headquarters becomes the supporting headquarters.  (JDP 0-01.1)
recognised theatre logistic picture
The aggregation of logistic data on quantities, location, condition and transit status to 
pro
vide a near real time disposition of logistic resources, which can be compared with 
rates of demand and replenishment to inform logistic planning.  (JDP 0-01.1)
recuperation 
T
he replacement of resources, including personnel and materiel, following 
operational activity in preparation for further operations.  It includes the training 
necessary to restore force elements to their normal readiness level (Rx).  (JDP 0-01.1)
redeployment 
T
he process of preparing and executing the relocation of units and materiel to a new 
destination.  This may be to a new deployment area or to peacetime locations where 
recuperation will take place.  (JDP 0-01.1)

247JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
rehabilitation 
T
he processing, usually in theatre in a relatively quiet area, of units, individuals and 
equipment recently withdrawn from combat operations, to prepare them for further 
combat operations.  (JDP 0-01.1; proposed modification)
relief-in-place
An operation in which, by direction of higher authority, all or part of a unit is replaced 
in an area b
y the incoming unit.  The responsibilities of the replaced elements for the 
mission and the assigned zone of operations are transferred to the incoming unit.  
The incoming unit continues the operation as ordered.  (AAP-06)
reverse supply chain
The returning of unserviceable and surplus it ems from the joint operations area. 
Note: Logistic staff in the joint operations area will identify surplus items and seek 
disposal instructions from Defence Equipment and Support.  Project Teams will 
request that certain specific items or ranges of items be returned from the joint 
operations area when no longer serviceable.  (JDP 0-01.1)
sponsored reserves
Sponsored reserves are civil servants or civilian p ersonnel who agree, in relation to a 
contract between MOD and their employer, to become special members of a Reserve 
force.  Following acceptance into the Reserve force, they have a legal obligation to 
undertake military training and be called-out to be members of the military force in 
order to continue to provide an assured service into an joint operations area.  
(JSP 567)
staging 
T
he process of assembling, temporary holding, and organising of arriving personnel 
and materiel into formed units, as they prepare for onward movement and further 
activities.  
Note: Staging is a life support function which, at its simplest, feeds and 
accommodates arriving personnel in a benign or protected environment.  (JDP 0-01.1) 
strategic base
Comprises military assets, industrial capacity b oth national and international, civilian 
contractors and National Health Service hospitals.
Note: Military assets include elements owned by the three single-Services, Joint 
Forces Command and Defence Equipment & Support.  (JDP 0-01.1)
supplies
All materiel and items used in the equipmen t, support and maintenance of military 
forces.  (AAP-06)

248 JDP 4-00 (4th Edition)
Lexicon
supply chain processing time (SCPT)
The time that it will take for demanded materiel t o reach the demanding unit.  This is 
based on the standard priority code of the demand, the time it takes for the demand 
to be processed in the strategic base, the capacity and speed of the Coupling Bridge 
and the time required for onward distribution within the joint operations area.  
(JDP 0-01.1)  
sustainability 
T
he ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of combat power for the duration 
required to achieve its objectives.  (AAP-06)
tactical control
The detailed and, usually, local direction and c ontrol of movements or manoeuvres 
necessary to accomplish missions or tasks assigned.  (AAP-06)
technical arrangement
A follow-on bilateral arrangement for a specified N ATO military activity.  It details the 
responsibilities and procedures for the provision of host-nation support by the host 
nation to the NATO Commander and sending nations.  (AJP-4.5(B))
transfer of authority
Within NATO, an action by which a member nation or NATO Command gives 
op
erational command or control of designated forces to a NATO Command.  (AAP-06)

 

[Page 260: No extractable text]

