[Page 1: No extractable text]

[Page 2: No extractable text]

JDP 05 i
Joint Doctrine Publication 05
Shaping a Stable World: the Military Contribution
Joint Doctrine Publication 05 (JDP 05), dated March 2016, 
is promulgated 
as directed by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Concepts and Doctrine
Conditions of release
1.  This information is Crown copyright.  The Ministry of Defence (MOD) exclusively 
owns the intellectual property rights for this publication.  You are not to forward, 
reprint, copy, distribute, reproduce, store in a retrieval system, or transmit its 
information outside the MOD without VCDS’ permission.
2.  This information may be subject to privately owned rights.

JDP 05 ii
Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for publishing 
strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine.  If you wish to quote our publications 
as reference material in other work, you should confirm with our editors whether the 
particular publication and amendment state remains authoritative.  We welcome your 
comments on factual accuracy or amendment proposals.  Please send them to:
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Ministry of Defence Shrivenham 
SWINDON, 
Wiltshire, 
SN6 8RF
Telephone:                  01793 314216/4217/4220      Facsimile number:      01793 314232
Military network:      96161 4216/4217/4220          Military network:        96161 4232
E-mail:        DCDC-DocEds@mod.uk 
All images, or otherwise stated are: © Crown copyright/MOD 2016.
Distribution
Distributing Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 05 is managed by the Forms and 
Publications Section, LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre, C16 Site, Ploughley 
Road, Arncott, Bicester, OX25 1LP .  All of our other publications, including a regularly 
updated DCDC Publications Disk, can also be demanded from the LCSLS Operations 
Centre.
LCSLS Help Desk:    01869 256197
Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications (including drafts) are available to view and download on the 
Defence Intranet (RLI) at: http://defenceintranet.diif.r.mil.uk/Organisations/Orgs/JFC/
Organisations/Orgs/DCDC  
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

iiiJDP 05 
Abstract
Purpose 
1. The purpose of Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 05, S haping a Stable World: the 
Military Contribution is to provide context and guidance on how, and why, the military 
instrument of power can be used in support of national strategies for addressing 
instability, crisis and conflict overseas.
Context
2. JDP 05 outlines how the UK seeks to help shape a more stable world as part 
of our national strategy and examines the military role within this.  This publication 
recognises the deliberate shift away from recent campaigns towards a more forward 
leaning and engaging approach.  The need for cross-government cooperation and 
understanding as part of an integrated approach is fundamental.
Scope
3. JDP 05 seeks to bridge the gap between JDP 3-40, S ecurity and Stabilisation: 
The Military Contribution and the new UK Government’s Approach to Stabilisation.1  The 
primary focus of JDP 05 remains stabilisation (responding to situations of conflict and 
instability).  However, this publication also considers the wider subject of stability.
4. In producing JDP 05, we consulted with a variety of stakeholders including: the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office; the Department for International Development; 
the Ministry of Defence; and the Stabilisation Unit.  Additionally, we received advice 
and input from a range of sources both inside and outside the military.  However, it is 
important to understand that this is principally a military publication intended for a 
military audience.  JDP 05 is both consistent and coherent with the position of other 
stakeholders and, in particular, with The UK Government’s Approach to Stabilisation 
produced by the Stabilisation Unit.
5. JDP 05 has been developed concurrently  with several new doctrinal and other, 
related publications.  In order to allow for a coherent transition, JDP 3-40, Security 
and Stabilisation: The Military Contribution will be retained within the current doctrinal 
architecture for a further 24 months as a subordinate (supporting) publication to 
JDP 05.  This will ensure that valuable knowledge remains accessible to the user 
community during this transition.  In 2018, JDP 05 will be reviewed, consolidated and 
merged with JDP 3-40 together with a number of related Joint Doctrine Notes (JDNs).   
1 The UK Government’s Approach to Stabilisation, 2014.

iv JDP 05 
Audience
6. The primary audience for JDP 05 is mi litary commanders and their respective 
staffs who are (or will become) involved in military operations that contribute 
to stability through the mechanism of stabilisation operations.  The secondary 
audience is members of other government departments, related non-governmental 
organisations and the private sector, whom the military are likely to work with as part 
of an integrated approach.
Structure
7. JDP 05 consists of four chapters.
a. Chapter 1 – Context introduces stability and stabilisation including the 
related national strategies.  This chapter also provides definitions and linkages 
to related doctrine (both national and NATO).  Chapter 1 introduces the UK 
approach to stabilisation and the associated principles.
b. Chapter 2 – Understanding stability and instability examines the topics 
of stability/instability to provide a contextual basis for better understanding 
the challenges for any military contribution.  There is also an examination of 
the causes of violent conflict and how these can be mitigated or negated.  The 
nature of this subject matter lends itself to a more academic style of prose and, 
consequently, Chapter 2 has been written in a way that does not conform to 
doctrinal norms.  This is deliberate and provides the necessary background to 
help the reader relate to the rest of the publication.
c. Chapter 3 – Ends, ways and means focuses on the key policies and strategies 
related to stabilisation and considers how they can be delivered by the military 
as part of an integrated approach.  This chapter considers the main instruments 
of national power, some of the key organisations involved with stabilisation and 
how stabilisation activities are resourced.
d. Chapter 4 – The military contribution focuses on the military contribution 
to help shape a stable world.  The chapter covers generic military activities 
(including influence) before looking in turn at the three main components of the 
new stabilisation approach (protect, promote and prepare).
Linkages 
8. JDP 05 is a thematic keystone doctrine publication that sits below JDP 0-01, UK 
Defence Doctrine and alongside JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine.  There are also 

vJDP 05 
links to a number of other national and NATO doctrine publications and these are 
explained in Chapter 1.
9. DCDC welcomes your feedback on this publication or any of our other 
publications.  Please address correspondence to the DCDC Doctrine Coordinator at:
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre, 
MOD Shrivenham, 
SWINDON, 
Wiltshire, 
SN6 8RF.

vi JDP 05 

JDP 05 vii
Contents
Abstract  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . iii
Chapter 1 – Context  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1
Chapter 2 – Understanding stability and instability  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .31
Chapter 3 – Ends, ways and means  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 55
Chapter 4 – The military contribution  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 81
Annex A – Defence Engagement inputs/activities categorisation  .  . 123
Annex B – The UK’s principles for stabilisation operations and 
                     programmes  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 127
Lexicon  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 129

[Page 10: No extractable text]

Context
Chapter 1 introduces stability and stabilisation including 
the related national strategies.  This chapter also provides 
definitions and linkages to related doctrine (both national 
and NATO).  Finally, this chapter introduces the UK 
approach to stabilisation and the associated principles.
Chapter 1
1
1
JDP 05
Section 1 – Introduction   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3
Section 2 – Strategies related to stability  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5
Section 3 – Defence doctrinal structure 
                       for stabilisation   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13
Section 4 – Definitions and descriptions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  16
Section 5 – The principles of stabilisation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  26

 JDP 05 2
1
The prudent use of military force has been a central 
contributor to the peace in Europe for seventy years, both 
in a deterrent capacity and playing a constructive role in 
countries from Bosnia to Mali.  The UK can contribute 
significantly to restoring stability.
House of Commons Defence Committee Tenth Report 
of Session 17 March 2015
”
“
The first, the supreme, the most far-reaching act of 
judgement that the statesman and commander have 
to make is to establish by that test the kind of war on 
which they are embarking; neither mistaking it for, nor 
trying to turn it into, something that is alien to its nature.  
This is the first of all strategic questions and the most 
comprehensive.
Carl von Clausewitz, 
On War 
”
“
Context

JDP 05 3
1
Chapter 1 – Context
Context
The importance of global stability to the UK
1.1. The UK’s ambition to contribute to a more stable world is articulated in a 
number of policies and strategies including: 
• The National Security Strategy (NSS) and Strategic Defence and Security Review 
(SDSR) 2015;1 
• the tri-departmental Building Stability Overseas Strategy (BSOS);2 and
• the Government’s International Defence Engagement Strategy (IDES).3 
The UK’s primary national interests are listed within the NSS as: 
• security;
• prosperity; and
• freedom.
1.2. These interests are interconnected and mutually supportive.  Security, 
prosperity and freedom form a virtuous circle – without security and the ability 
of UK citizens to live their lives freely, the foundations of prosperity and freedom 
would be undermined.  While the ability for the UK to engage across the world 
brings opportunities, it also makes the country potentially vulnerable to overseas 
1 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478933/52309_
Cm_9161_NSS_SD_Review_web_only.pdf
2 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-government-strategy-to-build-stability-overseas
3 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/international-defence-engagement-strategy
‘Our vision is for a secure and prosperous United Kingdom, with global reach and influence.  
Everything we do in the UK and around the world is driven by our determination to protect 
our people and our values, and ensure that our country prospers.’
The National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence 
and Security Review 2015
Section 1 – Introduction

 JDP 05 4
1
Any UK response 
will usually be 
part of a wider 
international 
effort.
”
“
Context
events.  This could include distant conflicts that threaten to disrupt the UK’s trade 
and investment opportunities.  The national interest is best served by: a secure and 
resilient UK; and helping to shape a stable world. 
1.3. Balancing the nation’s security risks an d its values presents a constant challenge 
for our Government as it decides how, when and where to tackle instability at 
source.  These competing interests are not mutually exclusive, however, there may 
be instances where one outweighs the other.  Protecting the UK’s security may 
sometimes necessitate working with countries who do not share the same values and 
standards.
1.4. Any UK response will usually be part of a wider international effort intended 
to shape the global environment and address both potential and actual threats 
at source.  Our Government recognises that this approach will require a variety of 
different actions as part of an integrated response to restore, develop or sustain 
stability.  For Defence, this can be a combination of routine and responsive Defence 
activities.  Consequently, the UK must be able to respond to instability across the 
full range of potential intervention scenarios ranging from early conflict prevention 
through to post-conflict stabilisation and subsequent activities.  Critical to this is an 
understanding from the outset that stabilisation is inherently a political process.  The 
military will often have a significant contribution to make, but this will almost always 
be in a supporting or enabling capacity.
1.5. In a globalised, competitive world, states  will legitimately set out to secure their 
own national security and achieve influence.  Our national strategy will be contested 
across the diplomatic, economic, military and informational contexts.  Therefore, 
formulating and executing national strategy (and thus, military strategy) is both 
dynamic and iterative.  This demands that we are inherently flexible – ready to react, 
both conceptually and physically, to change.
1.6. One of the key UK policy priorities is to prevent conflict or other crises from 
developing.  A crisis ordinarily marks the point beyond which the state’s ability 
to control and improve a situation is compromised.  The term crisis is also used to 
indicate a period of extreme instability.  Effective crisis management comprises:
• horizon scanning to help anticipate potential crises;
• the process of preventing, containing or  resolving crises before they develop 
into armed conflict;
• planning for possible escalation; and
• addressing the underlying causes.

JDP 05 5
1
Context
1.7. This does not imply that all crises can be managed.  Their characteristics are 
likely to change, not least in response to any military or other intervention, and not 
always in the ways envisaged.  The costs to the international community of managing 
violent conflict, together with the related effects and consequences, are extremely 
high.  BSOS identifies that it is more cost-effective to invest in conflict prevention and 
de-escalation than to pay the costs of responding to violent conflict once it occurs.
1.8. Our capstone Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine 
explains national, defence and military strategy.  National strategy ‘coordinates 
the instruments of national power in pursuit of national policy aims to secure our 
interests’.4  The UK’s national strategy is the responsibility of the Prime Minister and 
Cabinet, with advice from the National Security Council (NSC).  The Government’s 
political intentions may be articulated as a national strategic aim, or end-state, and 
will be supported by strategic objectives.
National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review
1.9. Our Government has committed to producing a new NSS and SDSR every five 
years.  Previously, these had been produced as separate (but related) documents but 
in 2015 these were amalgamated into a single publication.  Informed by the Global 
Strategic Trends (GST) programme and Joint Concept Note (JCN) 1/14, Defence Joint 
Operating Concept, the NSS is founded on an analysis of the strategic global context, 
along with an assessment of the UK’s place in the world.  Based on a strategic security 
risk analysis, the NSS describes the strategic posture we should adopt and sets out 
three core National Security Objectives (NSOs).
a. National Security Objective 1 is to protect our people – at home, in our 
Overseas Territories and abroad, and to protect our territory, economic security, 
infrastructure and way of life.
b. National Security Objective 2 is to project our global influence – reducing 
the likelihood of threats materialising and affecting the UK, our interests, and 
those of our allies and partners.
c. National Security Objective 3 is to promote our prosperity – seizing 
opportunities, harnessing innovation to strengthen our national security, and 
working with industry to ensure we have the capabilities and equipment that 
4 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine .
Section 2 – Strategies related to stability

 JDP 05 6
1
Context
we need.  Our economic and national securities go hand-in-hand.  Our strong 
economy provides the foundation to invest in our security and global influence, 
which in turn provides more opportunities at home and overseas for us to 
increase our prosperity.  A growing global economy helps to reduce poverty and 
build security for all.
Challenges and risks
1.10. The NSS identifies and explores four particular challenges that are likely to 
drive the UK’s security priorities for the coming decade.
a. The increasing threat posed by terrorism, extremism and instability.
b. The resurgence of state-based threats; and intensifying wider state 
competition.
c. The impact of technology, especially cyber threats; and wider 
technological developments.
d. The erosion of the rules-based international order, making it harder to 
build consensus and tackle global threats.
1.1 1. The NSS is informed by the National  Security Risk Assessment (NSRA) which 
seeks to categorise the domestic and overseas risks faced by the UK into three tiers.  
The most significant (Tier One) risks over the next five years are judged to be the 
following.
a. Terrorism.  This will remain the most direct and immediate threat to our 
domestic security and overseas interests.  Daesh, Al Qa’ida and affiliates remain 
committed to attacking UK and Western targets.
b. Cyber.  The cyber threats to the UK are significant and varied.  They 
include cyber terrorism, fraud and serious and organised crime, espionage and 
disruption of critical national infrastructure as it becomes more networked and 
dependent on technology, including networks and data held overseas.  Cyber 
risks underpin many of the other risks we face.
c. International military conflict.  The risk is growing.  Although it is unlikely 
that there will be a direct military threat to the UK itself, there is a greater 
possibility of international military crises drawing in the UK, including through 
our treaty obligations.  Our ability to respond effectively will be made harder

JDP 05 7
1
Context
by the growing use of asymmetric and hybrid tactics by states, combining 
economic coercion, disinformation, proxies, terrorism and criminal activity, 
blurring the boundaries between civil disorder and military conflict.
d. Instability overseas.  Since 2010, instability has spread significantly, 
especially in our extended neighbourhood, to the south in the Middle East and 
northern Africa and to the east in Ukraine.
e. Public health.  Disease, particularly pandemic influenza, emerging 
infectious diseases and growing antimicrobial resistance, threatens lives and 
causes disruption to public services and the economy.  The UK’s vulnerability is 
increased by our large population and open society.
f. Major natural hazards.  Events such as severe weather and major flooding 
can cost lives, cause disruption to critical national infrastructure and provision 
of essential services, and have a significant economic cost.
1.12. The NSS also identifies the following continuing risks:
• civil emergencies;
• major natural disasters;
• energy security;
• the global economy; and
• climate change and resource scarcity.
1.13. The 2015 SDSR sets the Armed Forces eight missions in support of the NSS. 
Routinely the Armed Forces will be required to do the following.
a. Defend and contribute to the security and resilience of the UK and 
Overseas Territories.  This includes deterring attacks; defending our airspace, 
territorial waters and cyber space; countering terrorism at home and abroad; 
supporting the UK civil authorities in strengthening resilience; and protecting 
our people overseas.
b. Provide the nuclear deterrent.  The UK’s independent nuclear deterrent 
will remain essential to our security today, and for as long as the global security 
situation demands.  It has existed for over 60 years to deter the most extreme 
threats to our national security and way of life, helping to guarantee our 
security, and that of our allies.

 JDP 05 8
1
Defence 
Engagement 
is the means 
by which we 
use our defence 
assets and 
activities, short 
of combat 
operations.
”
“
Context
c. Contribute to improved understanding of the world through strategic 
intelligence and the global defence network.  This includes close and enduring 
work with our allies and partners during peace and conflict.
d. Reinforce international security and the collective capacity of our allies, 
partners and multilateral institutions.  This includes work to help shape 
the international security environment, and to strengthen the rules-based 
international order through conflict prevention, capacity building and counter 
proliferation.
1.14. Our Armed Forces will also contribute to the Government’s response to crises 
by being prepared to:
• support humanitarian assistance and disaster response, and conduct rescue 
missions;
• conduct strike operations;
• conduct operations to restore peace and stability; and
• conduct major combat operations if required, including under North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Article 5.
International Defence Engagement Strategy 2013
1.15. The NSS states that we must use our national capabilities to promote our 
prosperity, extend our influence in the world and strengthen our security.  Defence 
Engagement is the means by which we use our defence assets and activities, short 
of combat operations, to achieve influence without using or threatening force.5  The 
IDES provides the framework within which Defence can, in partnership with other 
government departments, set geographical and thematic priorities for Defence 
Engagement.  The UK’s interests will continue to shift geographically, as will our 
ability to use long-standing relationships and the traditional institutions of global 
governance.  
1.16. There are a number of policy goals for Defence Engagement.  The IDES works 
towards policy end-states through four activities:
• security and non-combat operations;
• Defence diplomacy;
• Defence and security exports; and
• regional stability, conflict prevention, post-conflict reconstruction and 
stabilisation.
5 See Joint Doctrine Note 1/15, Defence Engagement.

JDP 05 9
1
Context
1.17. The IDES has been developed, in conjunction with the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office (FCO), to bring together all the levers available to Defence to 
deliver the relevant NSS objectives including: 
• treaties and alliances;
• senior-level visits;
• the Defence Attaché network;
• capacity building;
• civilian Defence advisers;
• loan-service personnel;
• overseas exchange and liaison officers;
• overseas training advisers;
• security sector reform;
• International Defence Training;
• conventional deterrence and reassurance;
• overseas joint exercises;
• ship, unit and aircraft visits; and
• Defence sales and Defence industry cooperation.
More detail can be found in the Defence Engagement taxonomy at Annex A.
Building Stability Overseas Strategy
1.18. BSOS is an integrated 6 strategy for conflict prevention, which sets the strategic 
framework for the Conflict, Stability and Security Fund (CSSF).7  BSOS outlines the three 
main, mutually-supporting, pillars of the Government’s stability strategy as being: early 
warning; rapid crisis prevention and response; and upstream conflict prevention.
a. Early warning.  The early warning system takes a global view of countries in 
which political, economic and security shocks over the next 12 months could 
trigger violence.  This is underpinned by all-source analysis from the Cabinet 
Office, FCO, Department for International Development (DFID), MOD and 
external experts, and is summarised annually.  Drawing on the annual review 
of the Countries at Risk of Instability report, an internal ‘watch list’ of fragile 
countries is produced, in which our Government assesses the risk of conflict and 
insecurity through analysing that state’s resilience to a shock event, particularly 
where the UK has interests at stake.  
b. Rapid crisis prevention and response.  The funding mechanisms to support 
an agile response will be delivered through the Conflict, Stability and Security 
6 FCO, Department for International Development (DFID) and MOD.
7 This was formerly known as the Conflict Pool.

 JDP 05 10
1
Context
Fund.  Rapid crisis prevention and responses may include the expeditionary 
diplomacy, stabilisation response teams and humanitarian action.  These are 
likely to be the focus for military activity.8
(1) Expeditionary diplomacy.  Rapid diplomatic efforts to build consensus 
for action to prevent conflict or to de-escalate crises are critical.  British 
expeditionary diplomacy has played a central role in responding to 
crises and shaping their future development.  However, cognisant of the 
effectiveness of a collective international approach in tackling crises, the UK 
will continue to build coalitions with allies and international organisations 
including the United Nations (UN), NATO and the European Union (EU).  
(2) Humanitarian action.  When crises create a humanitarian emergency, 
humanitarian action is a crucial part of the UK’s response.  The humanitarian 
space needs to be protected and expanded, including in fragile and 
conflict-affected states.  Humanitarian access is fundamental to ensure 
that those affected by disasters are protected and assisted.  This area is a 
primary focus for DFID.9
c. Upstream conflict prevention.  Work to prevent conflict is most likely to 
succeed when it aligns diplomatic efforts with development programmes and 
Defence Engagement as part of a shared and integrated strategy.  Homeland 
peace and stability within the UK is the result of the combined work of diplomats 
building influence, a strong economy and using our Armed Forces in deterring 
and, where necessary, overcoming threats.  Deterrence and coercion are crucial 
parts of the UK’s military strategy and are described in more detail in JDP 0-01, 
UK Defence Doctrine.  
1.19. Support to building legitimate governmental institutions in fragile states is a key 
priority for our Government and the wider international community.  The Government’s 
support to fragile and post-conflict countries may include: 
• building civilian leadership capacity; 
• developing policy and strategic planning; 
• human resources; and
• public communications.
The Government is also increasingly required to provide governance expertise 
(including advice on anti-corruption and transparency through the Building Integrity UK 
Programme) to help build stability overseas.
8 As articulated in Chapter 4.
9 Further detail on the military involvement in humanitarian action can be found in Allied Joint 
Publication (AJP)-3.4.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Military Support to  Peace Support.

JDP 05 11
1
Context
Countries at Risk of Instability report
1.20. The Countries at Risk of Instability (CRI) report is an analytical risk product 
for policy-makers that can be used to inform decisions around resources and 
priorities.   CRI is a Cabinet Office-led cross-government assessment of the risks 
of instability in fragile states.  Initial assessments are moderated by Departmental 
geographic sections.  The process is run annually to provide a one-year and five-year 
risk assessment by subject matter experts from the Cabinet Office, FCO, MOD, DFID, 
security and intelligence agencies, Home Office and National Crime Agency.  The risk 
assessment of instability in overseas countries is based on a statistical model which 
examines the strength of a country’s formal economic, political and social structures 
(its resilience), and the demands for change to these structures (pressure).  This is 
designed to provide policy-makers with a broad measure of risk that is agreed by all 
government departments and approved by the Joint Intelligence Committee.  The 
CRI is a vital part of the Conflict, Stability and Security Fund prioritisation process.  
The criteria considered and frequency of assessment makes this a powerful tool for 
highlighting trends and comparisons between countries.
1.21. The CRI has been an influential tool in National Security Council (NSC) 
discussions, in particular around prioritisation.  However, the timings of the CRI 
fall short of Whitehall’s increasing need to respond to emerging risks and crises.  
Consequently, some new products have been developed to be more responsive, 
within shorter time-scales.  They have been designed in consultation with 
departments across Whitehall, including DFID, and tested with some of the NSC 
Regional Boards.
BuBBuBuBBBuBBB ilililillilildidididididididiidingngnngngng lllegegegegegitititimimimimatatatateeeeee gogovevernrnrnmentnnnn alaa  insnsnnsn tittitututiionons isisisisis aaaaa kkkkkkeyeyeyeyeyeyey pppppprirririorroorrititiiityyyyy

 JDP 05 12
1
Context
New cross-Whitehall early warning products 
1.22. The Joint Intelligence Organisation in the Cabinet Office have launched a 
new set of early warning products for use across Whitehall to provide more regular 
tracking and monitoring of instability.  These products are designed to complement 
the annual Countries at Risk of Instability report, and are intended to link in with the 
NSC and NSC Regional Boards.  There are two new products.
a. Quarterly CRI tracker – the quarterly CRI tracker provides detailed trend 
assessments on 50 countries deemed a priority by NSC Strategy Boards.  It 
draws on CRI annual assessment and integrates with other periodic warning 
assessments from across government and open source.  It focuses on the risks 
to stability from a range of political, economic, social and international drivers. 
The assessment goes to NSC Regional Boards’ quarterly meetings and the NSC 
(Officials) group.
b. Instability alerts – these alerts are intended to be fast turn-around 
assessments that respond to ground swells of instability risk that are not 
captured as part of the quarterly CRI tracker, or annual CRI reports.  The alert 
highlights the most likely trajectory and key factors to monitor more closely.
Cross-Whitehall coordination
1.23. The Conflict, Stability and Security Fund Joint Secretariat continue to act 
as the central coordination function for early warning across Whitehall.  It is their 
responsibility to ensure alerts reach the right board, and to monitor and track any 
actions that are taken as a result.
The Register of British Interests
1.24. The Register of British Interests is intended to provide a basis for 
understanding which countries objectively matter most to the UK.  It provides an 
evidence-based starting point, from which policy-makers can make judgements 
about prioritising and allocating governmental effort and resources.  The register 
does not include any judgements about political interests.  Its primary function is to 
provide a filter for the Countries at Risk of Instability report.  The register attempts to 
recognise the diverse range of UK interests, grouping them into four categories: 
• security threats;
• economic and commercial;
• allies and influencers; and
• people and communities.

JDP 05 13
1
Figure 1.1 – UK doctrine architecture for stabilisation
Context
1.25. Data is collected on a range of measurable factors under each domain.  This 
data allows countries to be given an index score and to be categorised as very high 
interest, high interest, medium interest, low interest or minimal interest.  The register 
is updated annually by the Early Warning Team within the Cabinet Office.
1.26. Figure 1.1 is an extract from the UK Joint Defence Doctrine Architecture.  This 
illustrates where JDP 05 sits within the broader (and related) architecture.
Section 3 – Defence doctrinal structure 
for stabilisation
JDP 0-01
UK Defence 
Doctrine 
JDP 01
UK Joint 
Operations
Doctrine
JDP 3-40
Security and 
Stabilisation AJP-3.4
NA5CROArmy Field 
Manual 
Volume 1 
Part 9
AJP-3.4.1
Peace
Support
AJP-3.4.2
NEO
AJP-3.4.3
Humanitarian
Assistance
AJP-3.4.4
COIN
AJP-3.4.5
S&R
Legend
AJP Allied Joint Publication
CIMIC Civil-Military Cooperation
COIN   Counterinsurgency
JDN Joint Doctrine Note
JDP Joint Doctrine Publication
NA5CRO     Non-Article 5 Crisis Response Operations
JDP 05
Shaping a 
Stable World 
NEO Non-combatant Evacuation Operations
S&R Stabilization and Reconstruction
SFA Security Force Assistance
                     UK national joint doctrine
                     NATO doctrine
                     Land doctrine
JDN 1/15
Defence
Engagement
AJP-3.16
SFA
AJP-3.22
Stability
Policing
AJP-3.4.9
CIMIC

 JDP 05 14
1
Context
1.27. JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine10 outlines the broad philosophy and principles 
underpinning the employment of the UK’s Armed Forces.  This provides the basis 
from which all other subordinate national doctrine is derived and describes in detail 
how operations are directed, mounted, commanded, executed, sustained and 
recovered.
1.28. JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine11 provides a bridge from UK to NATO 
operational-level doctrine, thereby framing NATO doctrine in a national context to 
ensure its utility for a UK Joint Force Commander and their staff.  JDP 01 does not 
duplicate existing operational-level doctrine, but signposts the appropriate NATO 
publication.  This publication also fills the gap in those planning and operations 
doctrine areas which are not fully addressed in existing NATO publications, or where 
we have a unique and relevant doctrinal or philosophical approach which must be 
retained.  UK Joint Operations Doctrine also provides the strategic context for national 
and coalition operations, explaining:
• how our national military instrument works alongside other levers of 
national power when pursuing policy objectives;
• our structures and processes for formulating strategy and for crisis 
management; and
• how to bridge the gap between UK and NATO processes.
1.29. JDP 05 does not duplicate information that is already contained within the 
extant national or NATO doctrine.  Further information can be obtained, where 
necessary, from the appropriate JDP or Allied joint publication (AJP).
1.30. JDP 3-40, Security and Stabilisation: The Military Contribution published in 2009, 
is almost exclusively focused on stabilisation-based experiences gained in Iraq and 
Afghanistan.  JDP 3-40 will remain part of the doctrinal architecture for the near-term 
noting that it is subordinate to JDP 05.  In the medium-term, it will be removed and 
any essential detail will be subsumed within a revised JDP 05.
1.31. Tactical doctrine – the UK Land tactical-level doctrine is covered in Army Field 
Manual, Volume 1, Part 9, Tactics for Stability Operations.12  This publication provides 
guidance for planning and conducting stabilising operations.  It is a commander’s 
guide to the tactics, techniques and procedures used when conducting military 
operations in support of political stabilisation aims as part of the UK approach.
10 JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine.
11 JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine.
12 http://akx.landforces.r.mil.uk/baebb/admin/DocLib%20%20Doctrine/20131024_
AFMVol1Pt9StabOps_DLWPubs_P _R. pdf  Only available on Dii systems.

JDP 05 15
1
Context
1.32. JDN 1/15, Defence Engagement sets out the intellectual and policy framework 
within which the UK conducts Defence Engagement, providing guidance to 
personnel from MOD Head Office, the Services, Defence Engagement practitioners or 
the wider Whitehall community.  JDN 1/15:
• defines the roles and responsibilities for each level of Defence Engagement 
planning; 
• explains how the priorities are set;
• provides direction to the top-level budget holders; and 
• articulates how performance is measured against both Defence and 
national objectives.
1.33. The NATO Allied Joint Publication-3.4 series also includes a number of thematic 
publications that relate, in varying degrees, to stabilisation and stability.  These AJPs 
are:
• AJP-3.4, Allied Joint Doctrine for Non-Article 5 Crisis Response Operations;13
• AJP-3.4.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Peace Support Operations;
• AJP-3.4.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Non-combatant Evacuation Operations;
• AJP-3.4.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Humanitarian Assistance;
• AJP-3.4.4, Allied Joint Doctrine for Counterinsurgency;
• AJP-3.4.5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Military Support to Stabilization and 
Reconstruction;
• AJP-3.4.9, Allied Joint Doctrine for Civil-Military Cooperation;
• AJP-3.16, Allied Joint Doctrine for Security Force Assistance;14 and
• AJP-3.22, Allied Joint Doctrine for Stability Policing.
1.34. Other NATO doctrine contains guidelines on operations and planning.  
Where necessary, any specific UK national differences are added to the AJP in the 
appropriate place as text with a green background (known as ‘green pages’).
13 AJP-3.4, Allied Joint Doctrine for Non-Article 5 Crisis Response Operations may be removed from the 
NATO architecture.
14 The doctrine on security force assistance (SFA) is being developed and has not yet been published.  
It will describe how NATO may assist a host nation in developing a sustainable capability that is able to 
defend against internal and transnational threats to stability and security.  SFA can be delivered during 
any phase of an operation and across the full range of military operations.  SFA actions are conducted 
with, through, and by local forces to both develop and improve their capacity and capabilities through 
generate, organize, train, equip, advise and mentor (GOTEAM) activities.

 JDP 05 16
1
Stability should 
be viewed 
as an evolving 
process that 
includes 
short-term, 
medium-term 
and long-term 
objectives. 
”
“
Context
Key differences and inconsistencies
1.35. There are a number of known (and accepted) inconsistencies between JDP 05 
and other related doctrine.  The key inconsistencies are as follows.
a. NATO doctrine.  NATO doctrine explicitly links stabilisation with 
reconstruction which the UK does not.15
b. US doctrine.  The US has historically viewed stabilisation as being a subset 
of counter-insurgency and their doctrine reflects this.16
Structural stability
1.36. Structural stability is a long-term goal described in the BSOS as being, ‘political 
systems which are representative and legitimate, capable of managing conflict and 
change peacefully, and societies in which human rights and rule of law are respected, 
basic needs are met, security established and opportunities for social and economic 
development are open to all’.17  The BSOS commits the UK to engaging in a variety of 
activities including:
• humanitarian action;
• diplomacy;
• Defence Engagement; and
• development and trade.
1.37. Structural stability exists within states that are built with the consent of the 
population, are resilient and flexible in the face of shocks, and able to evolve.  The 
structural stability sought by the UK reflects a long-term process developed over 
time, where the degree of stability increases as changes take effect.  Stability 
should be viewed as an evolving process that includes short-term, medium-term 
and long-term objectives.  Focusing on short-term stability objectives that do not 
contribute to an enduring political strategy is unlikely to succeed in achieving the 
desired long-term outcome. 
15 See AJP-3.4.5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Stabilization and Reconstruction , for further details.
16 See US Joint Publication (JP) 3-07, Stabilization Operations and Field Manual (FM) 3-24, Insurgencies and 
Countering Insurgencies, for further detail.
17 Building Stability Overseas Strategy , 2011, page 5.
Section 4 – Definitions and descriptions

JDP 05 17
1
Context
1.38. The UK’s perception of what constitutes stability may not always reflect the 
views or desires of other actors.  Some states or actors achieve stability by suppressing 
social unrest, restricting human rights and imprisoning political opponents as a way of 
preserving power.  Such approaches are not supported by the UK.
1.39. The extent to which the international community (or the UK) is able to 
influence other states or actors to engage in political and social change is based on 
a combination of soft and hard power.18  The degree and level of engagement will 
depend on the national interests of the intervening bodies concerned.  Engagement 
may be more willingly received when a government is faced with crisis and is 
therefore required to rely on support from external actors.  In such cases, the degree 
of influence or assistance accepted may wane as a crisis is resolved or averted and 
the situation improves.  Maintaining the impetus and consensus among a state’s 
leadership to pursue long-term stability outcomes is one of the main challenges 
facing the international community. 
1.40. The UK aims to work in partnership with states to develop stability.  However, 
there may be instances when a state’s actions, or inactions, may prompt the 
international community or a coalition of nations to intervene in the interests of 
international peace and security.  Such interventions may not always be consistent 
with the wishes of that state.  An uninvited response by members of the international 
community could undermine a state’s sovereignty, or the regional balance of power 
which could lead to increased instability in the short to medium term.  While this may 
seem counter-intuitive, structural stability remains the longer-term objective. 
1.41. In parallel with globalisation, an d the international outcry following the 
atrocities witnessed at the end of the 20th Century in places such as the Balkans and 
Rwanda, a new international consensus arose placing the individual at the heart of the 
security debate.  This resulted in an evolution of the so-called right of humanitarian 
intervention to a new concept know as the Responsibility to Protect (R2P).  Adopted 
by UN General Assembly Resolution 60/1 in 2005, the R2P reaffirms state sovereignty 
by recognising the state’s primary duty to protect its population from the commission 
of certain defined atrocities.  The R2P then goes further to place a responsibility on 
the international community to assist individual states to meet their obligations and, 
in extremis, with the authority of a UN Security Council mandate or the consent of the 
host nation, to intervene including by the use of military force.  Such intervention is 
considered to constitute the last resort  where the host nation proves unwilling or 
unable to meet its responsibility.  Whilst the R2P has been invoked in a number of 
UN Security Council Resolutions, military action has only been authorised once in 
respect of the situation in Libya in 2011.  Whilst the principles enshrined in the R2P 
may be seen as universal, action taken in furtherance of them and in particular the 
18 For more on soft and hard power see JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine .

 JDP 05 18
1
Context
use of military force has proved controversial.  The situation is further complicated 
as the R2P has proved open to misuse being invoked by some regional powers to 
claim legitimacy for their interventions into sovereign states, as seen in Russia’s 
involvement in Ukraine.   
Stabilisation
1.42. The term stabilisation has varyin g meanings and connotations depending 
on different perspectives within national and international communities.  Military 
and civilian interpretations of the meaning of stabilisation can differ.  Where our 
shared interests and values coincide, we will act with others using NATO doctrine 
as a common reference.  Therefore the definition of stabilisation for all UK military 
doctrine should be consistent with that used within AJP-3.4.5, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Military Support to Stabilization and Reconstruction.  19 20 21
NATO definition (military) UK national perspective
Stabilization19 is an approach used 
to mitigate crisis and promote 
legitimate political authority, using 
comprehensive civilian and military 
actions to reduce violence, re-establish 
security, end social, economic, and 
political turmoil, and set the conditions 
for long-term stability.20
Stabilisation is one of the approaches 
used in situations of violent conflict 
which is designed to protect and 
promote legitimate political authority, 
using a combination of integrated civilian 
and military actions to reduce violence, 
re-establish security and prepare for 
longer-term recovery by building an 
enabling environment for structural 
stability.21
1.43. Stabilisation is not an end in itself.  To successfully bring about structural 
stability, stabilisation needs to be applied with other approaches, including 
longer-term state-building and peace-building as described by DFID.22  The 
stabilisation approach is intended to provide sufficient stability to initiate an inclusive 
political settlement and begin to address the primary drivers of violent conflict.  
Stabilisation is the first step towards progress on state-building and peace-building in 
very insecure environments.23
1.44. Stabilisation is applied in politica lly difficult and complex environments in 
which the state is not necessarily the legitimate political authority.  The state may be 
19 NATO spells stabilization with a ‘z’, this publication will use the English spelling throughout (except 
when quoting NATO).
20 AJP-3.4.5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Military Support to Stabilization and Reconstruction .
21 The UK Government’s Approach to Stabilisation , 2014.
22 Building Peaceful States and Socities:  a DFID practice paper, 2010.
23 Ibid., page 36.

JDP 05 19
1
Context
only one of several groups of actors which uses force.  In some cases, the state may 
be an active cause and driver of the conflict (for example, the recent events in Syria).  
The political settlement may be contested, or absent altogether.  Legitimate political 
authority cannot be projected effectively in the face of high levels of violence.
1.45. In such situations, there is a strong political imperative to persuade key 
stakeholders to reduce violence.  Identifying which political players are best-placed 
to provide transitional leadership and authority, albeit with significant external 
assistance, requires careful political analysis, engagement and understanding.  This 
will be done alongside other government departments as part of the integrated 
approach. 
1.46. External support alone cannot create legitimate political authority.  Although 
such backing can provide initial credibility and legitimacy, it can also damage 
these, for example, if a domestic political actor is seen to be too close to foreign 
governments, at the expense of its own citizens.  The foundations of an inclusive 
political settlement must be built from the outset, while continually analysing and 
responding to changes in the political context.
1.47. Stabilisation is an organising approach rather than a goal and, as such, it sits 
above, and alongside, a wide variety of other activities and/or operations.  The key 
point is to recognise that other types of military activity may contribute positively or 
negatively to a stabilisation approach; whether by deliberate design or, in some cases, 
as an unintended consequence.  Stabilisation is inherently messy and complicated 
and will be affected by a wide range of factors and considerations as illustrated in 
Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2 – The complexity of stabilisation


 JDP 05 20
1
The Defence 
contribution to 
stabilisation is 
foremost an 
enabling (or 
supporting) 
one.
”
“
Context
Building stability
1.48. The UK’s political focus is directed to wards building stability as exemplified in 
the NSS and BSOS.  Structural stability is the desired end-state and stabilisation is one 
of the processes (ways and means) that can help attain the desired end-state.  The 
Defence contribution to stabilisation is foremost an enabling (or supporting) one – 
noting that in crisis and conflict, security will always be a significant factor.  However, 
security will be less relevant in mitigating other non-violent causes of instability such 
as natural disasters.
The stabilisation approach
1.49. The UK stabilisation approach has four underlying facets.
a. Any stabilisation action will be planned and implemented with an overtly 
political objective in mind.  Ideally this should be with a means of identifying 
success and a process of transition to a longer-term approach.
b. The stabilisation approach must be an integrated, civilian-led approach 
which unifies effort across government.  Even when there are military-led and 
implemented tasks in stabilisation (such as using patrols to bolster local 
security), they should occur in the context of an operationally civilian-led, 
politically-engaged stabilisation approach.  Civilian actors will lead in other 
areas of security, as well as justice, governance and development activities – all 
of which may be applied within the stabilisation approach.
c.     The stabilisation approach is both 
flexible and targeted.  This can apply in a 
state, or part of a state, which is affected by 
violent political conflict, or a region, that 
undermines local and/or regional stability.  
Stabilisation is frequently applied at a sub-
national level – for example, in a discrete 
province or border region.  Crucially, local-
level stabilisation should be planned and 
implemented to meet the requirement 
to promote the wider political settlement 
without becoming overly focused on 
tactical gains.
LoLoLoLoLooLoLoLocacacacacacaacacac l l lllll ininninnininnvovvovovovov lvlvl emememenene t t t hahahaaaah ss s s sss clclclclclclcclcc eaeaeaeaeeaeaearrrrrrr adadadaadadvavavavavavantntntntntttagagagaggagesesesesees ffffffororororrr ssssssstatatataaataaabibiliiiiiiiisassasasass titititiononoonnnnnn

JDP 05 21
1
Figure 1.3 – Factors contributing to stability
Context
d. Although transitory, stabilisation cannot afford to be short-term in outlook 
or objectives.  It must be planned and implemented with reference to other 
parallel, or future longer-term engagement.  For example, it may be necessary 
to strike a pact over security arrangements in the short-term, but these should 
have review mechanisms built into them to ensure that they do not become 
permanent without wider consultation.  Opportunities to build local capacity 
and promote local ownership during stabilisation interventions can bring clear 
advantages post-transition and must not be ignored.
1.50. Core components.  The UK approach identifies three core components of 
stabilisation:
• protect political actors, the political system and the population;
• promote, consolidate and strengthen political processes; and
• prepare for longer-term recovery.
Figure 1.3 illustrates the relationship between stability and stabilisation.  In particular, 
this shows how the stabilisation approach is one of the components that may 
contribute towards stability.  Note that the principal military involvement will occur 
both as part of stabilisation and also within the ‘upstream’ area in the form of Defence 
Engagement.
Early 
warning
Crisis 
prevention and 
response
Upstream 
prevention
•  Humanitarian 
   assistance
•  Diplomacy
•  Stabilisation (3Ps)
•  Military assistance
  •  Defence 
     Engagement
  •  Development
  •  Diplomacy
•  Horizon scanning
•  Countries at Risk 
   of Instability
•  Intelligence 
   assessments
Stability
Legend
3Ps   •  Protect political actors, the political system and the population
          •  Promote, consolidate and strengthen political processes
          •  Prepare for longer-term recovery

 JDP 05 22
1
The ability 
to generate 
security is a 
key enabling 
factor for 
stabilisation.
”
“
Context
1.51. The core components of stabilisation/the 3Ps framework.  The UK Government’s 
Approach to Stabilisation 2014 outlines three mutually reinforcing components of 
stabilisation.  There are referred to as the ‘3Ps framework’.  The framework is used in 
Chapter 4 to illustrate military involvement in specific areas.
a. P1 – Protect political actors, the political system and the population.  
In fragile and conflict-affected states, as in all states, power is established 
and protected through force and the threat of force.  The UK’s stabilisation 
approach explicitly enables the deployment of external military force to 
manage existing violence and deter further outbreaks.  This may, or may not, 
involve UK forces in direct combat activities.  More likely, the UK would be 
playing a supporting role as part of an internationally-mandated force.  The 
ability to generate security is a key enabling factor for stabilisation.
b. P2 – Promote, consolidate and strengthen political processes.  In 
stabilisation contexts, a political settlement will be lacking, nascent or 
rudimentary and considerable efforts will be required to foster or develop 
it.  Where a settlement does exist, it will often be inherently fragile and 
unconsolidated, may have limited endorsement from those on the ground 
and will often be contested.  The political arena is likely to be militarised and 
characterised by significant fragmentation and factionalisation.  Therefore, 
appreciating how political outcomes will affect security is critical because 
institutions and communities are likely to be polarised and aligned with 
armed groups.  In such contexts, stabilisation can support interim political 
arrangements and lay the foundations for a fuller and more enduring political 
settlement to take shape.  If a settlement has already been negotiated, 
stabilisation can support political processes to consolidate a nascent political 
settlement.
c. P3 – Preparing for longer-term recovery.  Stabilisation alone will not be 
able to foster strong state-society relations or address the underlying causes of 
conflict as these can only be achieved through longer-term peace-building and 
state-building.  However, from the outset, the stabilisation approach should 
be based on an understanding of the conflict dynamics and their impacts on 
the population.  The approach should also incorporate planning for transition.  
Successful recovery will enable broader government engagement in a country 
by the FCO, MOD and DFID.
1.52. Shifting emphasis.  Figure 1.4 depicts how the emphasis on protection is a 
major driver at the beginning of a campaign.  However, later (after the environment 
has stabilised) the overall emphasis has shifted towards preparing mechanisms 
for the future.  This illustrates how protect, promote and prepare are not a linear 

JDP 05 23
1
Figure 1.4 – Protect, promote and prepare shifting emphasis
Context
development but that they represent a holistic approach to conflict resolution 
objectives.  Adopting this concept in an integrated manner by the whole of 
government exemplifies how our Government will engage and address issues of 
upstream conflict prevention, or downstream peace-enforcement, stabilisation, 
recovery and reconstruction operations. 
1.53. Conflict prevention involves applying structural or diplomatic measures to 
keep intra- or inter-state tensions and disputes from escalating into violent conflict.  
Ideally, it should be structured on early warning, information gathering and a careful 
analysis of the factors driving the conflict.24  When a crisis builds between two or 
more parties, external diplomatic, economic and military pressure (possibly including 
military intervention) is brought to bear in an effort to deter or contain conflict.  If 
this pressure succeeds, the crisis will abate and a degree of stability will return.  If 
it fails there may be a full-blown conflict.  When the fighting stops – often with a 
truce leading to a more permanent peace agreement – external military forces may 
intervene (if they haven’t already) to enforce, and subsequently to keep the peace.  
The level of any coercion applied by external forces should decline as the situation 
stabilises until, eventually, the peacekeepers withdraw.  The main focus of prevention 
is, therefore, on developing potent ‘upstream’ diplomatic, economic and military 
actions to keep the situation below the crisis line.  Military action can be seen as 
following the sequence of ‘shape, deter, coerce and intervene’ as the crisis escalates; 
in other words, the use of force becomes more overt as the situation worsens.
24 UN Peacekeeping Operations – principles and guidelines .
Promote Prepare
Protect
Promote
Prepare
Protect

 JDP 05 24
1
Current 
government 
policy is to 
focus on early 
engagement 
to prevent 
a fragile 
situation 
deteriorating 
into violent 
conflict.  
”
“
Context
1.54. Early engagement.  The ends, ways and means to building stability have 
evolved from previous stabilisation doctrine.25  A key change has been the shift in 
orientation towards explicitly political activity with a greater emphasis on tailoring 
activities to specific conflicts (and different contexts within one conflict).  Stabilisation 
is not an upstream conflict prevention activity nor will it tackle the drivers of conflict, 
however, it must remain aware of conflict drivers so as not to inhibit later post-conflict 
activity.  Current government policy is to focus on early engagement to prevent a 
fragile situation deteriorating into violent conflict.  This is, however, the ideal.  The 
reality is that the UK and wider international community are often unable to prevent 
a country from deteriorating into conflict.  Stabilisation is a critical approach for 
engaging in conflict with the aim of promoting a longer lasting, politically sound 
outcome which promotes international stability.
Additional definitions and descriptions
1.55. There are a number of other related terms and their definitions/descriptions 
that should be understood.
a. Reconstruction.  The NATO definition of reconstruction used within 
AJP-3.4.5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Stabilization and Reconstruction is: the 
process of developing or redeveloping structures that permit sustainable 
self-government, social and economic development, and security.
b. The state.  The state is the principal unit for exercising public authority 
in defined territories in modern times.  It is also the central structure in 
international relations.26  The state consists of several components.
(1) Firstly, there are institutions or ru les which regulate political, social 
and economic engagement across a territory and determine how 
public authority is obtained and used (for example, constitutions, laws, 
customs).  These may be formal or informal.
(2) Secondly, there are organisations at the national and the 
sub-national level which operate within those rules (for example, the 
executive, legislature, judiciary, bureaucracy, ministries, military, tax 
authorities).
c. Government.  A government refers to the specific administration in power 
at any one moment (the governing coalition of political leaders), while the 
state is the basis for a government’s authority, legality, and claim to popular 
25 Principally JDP 3-40, Security and Stabilisation: The Military Contribution.
26 DFID, Building Peaceful States and Societies : a DFID practice paper, page 12, 2010.

JDP 05 25
1
Context
support.  The state provides the structure within which a government can 
operate.27 
d. Peace-building.  Peace-building aims to establish peace, characterised by 
social harmony, respect for the rule of law and human rights, and social and 
economic development.  This is supported by political institutions that are able 
to manage change and resolve disputes, without resorting to violent conflict 
and avoiding a relapse back into conflict.28  
e. State-building.  State-building is concerned with the state’s capacity, 
institutions and legitimacy, and with the political and economic processes that 
underpin state-society relations.  This is a long-term, historically rooted and 
internal process, driven by a wide range of local and national actors.  In fragile 
contexts, it often reveals tensions between state and non-state actors, with 
each wanting to exert influence and establish a dominant position.29  
f. Counter-insurgency.  Counter-insurgency is a comprehensive civilian and 
military effort made to defeat an insurgency and address any core grievances.30  
Further details on counter-insurgency can be found in AJP-3.4.4, Allied Joint 
Doctrine for Counterinsurgency. 
1.56. Key international stakeholders.  Stabilisation operations are usually conducted 
in complex environments.  Within this space, military actors (and their activities) will 
impact on, and be affected by numerous international actors.  
a. In many instances, the multilateral and bilateral actor’s mandates and 
objectives will overlap, causing duplication.  It is paramount that the military 
commander understands which international organisations are present in 
theatre, what their mandates are and how best to work with them.
b. Many, if not all, of the followin g agencies and programmes will be 
present or have a stake in stabilisation outcomes and effects.  These include 
the: UN; NATO;31 EU; Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe; 
African Union; the World Bank; and a variety of other bilateral diplomatic and 
development programmes.  
c. The UN will have a wide range of operations and agencies present, 
which may include: a peace support operation; UN High Commissioner for 
27 DFID, Building Peaceful States and Societies : a DFID practice paper, 2010.
28 Ibid.
29 Ibid.
30 Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-06, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions.
31 Refer to NATO doctrine – AJP-3.4.5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Stabilization and Reconstruction .
Stabilisation 
operations 
are usually 
conducted 
in complex 
environments. 
”
“

 JDP 05 26
1
Context
Refugees; UN Development Programme; UN Police Component as part of 
the peace support operation; Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs; or the UN Office on Drugs and Crime.  Not all of these will necessarily 
be subordinated to the peace support operation and many will have separate 
reporting chains.  Particular care and sensitivity will be required when 
engaging with humanitarian agencies when military actors are pursuing a 
stabilisation agenda which is overtly political.  
d. The EU is likely to also have a range of operations and instruments in 
theatre, including a Common Security and Defence Policy operation, an EU 
military mission, a Commission-funded development programme and financial 
programmes.  
e. In the European context, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe may be deployed, for example, to conduct the monitoring of a cease-
fire or electoral observation.
1.57. Stabilisation principles provide a framework to assist with understanding, 
planning and implementing a stabilisation intervention.  Within the UK approach to 
stabilisation there are two separate (but closely related) sets of principles.  They are 
the: 
• UK principles of stabilisation (as ar ticulated by the Stabilisation Unit and 
representing the integrated government view), included at Annex B; and 
• security principles of stabilisation, which are more military specific and are 
listed at Figure 1.5.  
Although plainly two different lists, there are areas of overlap and in each instance the 
underlying intents are coherent. 
1.58. Stabilisation security principles apply specifically to the military context and, 
although similar to the national principles, are more geared towards the military 
contribution.  Figure 1.5 lists the stabilisation security principles. 
Section 5 – The principles of stabilisation

JDP 05 27
1
Context
Stabilisation security principles
Primacy of political purpose
Political aims dictate the desired outcome and drive the planning and conduct of 
the campaign.
Unity of effort
Military force is only one element required to deliver security and stabilisation.  The 
collective contribution of all actors is required and must be coordinated to ensure 
unity of effort is achieved in every facet of the mission.
Understand the context
A shared understanding of the context within which insecurity and instability has 
arisen, between the UK military and their immediate partners, is essential to provide 
a basis for focused and coordinated action.
Focus on the population; including their security
The population’s needs, whose expectations will vary, must be met to promote 
human security and encourage support for the (desired) political settlement.
Foster host nation governance, authority and indigenous capacity
Host nation ownership of, and responsibility for, security and stabilisation requires 
developing sufficient governance, authority and indigenous capability.
Neutralise malign actors
By isolating malign actors (including those who violently oppose the government32) 
from the source of their support, they can be made irrelevant.  Note, however, that 
in some instances, a sustainable political settlement may require the inclusion of 
irregular actors or ‘spoilers’. 
Gain and maintain popular support
Support the local government to gain and maintain legitimacy.  Credibility must act 
as a lever to shift tacit consent into active support for the campaign.  UK forces must 
be perceived to be legitimate and credible, both regionally and locally (especially 
amongst opinion-forming elites).
32 Noting that we may not always be supporting the extant government (for example, Libya, Syria).

 JDP 05 28
1
Stabilisation security principles (continued)
Prepare for the longer term
Stabilising a failed or failing state will often take a long time.  This will require 
providing significant cross-government resources, immersion in the problem, and 
demonstrating resilience in the face of (almost inevitable) short-term setbacks.
Anticipate, learn and adapt
Complex, uncertain and dynamic operating environments demand anticipation, 
learning and adaptation (without detrimentally affecting the maintenance of the 
aim).  Adversaries will adapt; so must the UK forces if these adversaries are to be 
outwitted.
Operate in accordance with the law
Applicable laws on operations will be unique and are dependent on the mandate. 
However, UK Forces are always bound by our own national law and applicable 
policies and the UK Government interpretations of International Law (and 
International Human Rights Law).  Host nation law should be respected where it is 
not incompatible with our own laws.  Further guidance may be in a Status of Forces 
Agreement (SOFA) or be provided by a legal adviser.  The strategic consequence 
of ‘not’ operating in accordance with the law in a stabilisation context undermines 
legitimacy.
Figure 1.5 – The stabilisation security principles
Context

JDP 05 29
1
Context
Key points 
• Our national interest is best served by a secure and resilient UK and shaping a 
stable world.
• Any UK response will usually be part of a wider international effort.
• Our response to instability and conflict is to apply the instruments of national 
power – economic, military and diplomatic, underpinned by information.
• We must use our national capabilities to build our prosperity, extend our 
influence in the world and strengthen our security.
• The three main, mutually-supporting, pillars of the Government’s stability 
strategy are: early warning; rapid crisis prevention and response; and upstream 
conflict prevention.
• Structural stability exists within states that are built with the consent of the 
population, are resilient and flexible in the face of shocks, and are able to evolve. 
• Stability should be viewed as an evol ving process that includes short-term, 
medium-term and long-term objectives. 
• Stabilisation is applied in politically diff icult and complex environments in which   
the state is not necessarily the legitimate political authority.
• Stabilisation is an organising approach rather than a goal and as such it sits 
above, and alongside, a wide variety of other activities and/or operations. 
• Any stabilisation action will be p lanned and implemented with an overtly 
political objective in mind.
• The stabilisation approach must be an integrated, civilian-led approach which 
unifies effort across government.
• The stabilisation approach is both flexible and targeted.
• Although transitory, stabilisation cannot afford to be short-term in outlook or 
objectives.

[Page 40: No extractable text]

JDP X-XX (X Edition)
Understanding 
stability and instability
This chapter considers the role and legitimacy of the state 
in maintaining its own stability within the wider context of 
the international system and the challenges to this.  This 
includes examining the elements of a stable state and what 
causes them to break down.  The final section discusses how 
instability can lead to violent intra-state conflict and the need 
to understand the causes to frame a successful intervention.
Chapter 2
31
2
JDP 05
Section 1 – The role of the state in maintaining 
                       stability   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  33
Section 2 – Legitimacy.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  37
Section 3 – The elements of a stable state   .  .  .  .  .  .  38
Section 4 – Instability and violent conflict   .  .  .  .  .  .  47

 JDP 05 32
2
Now there is a requirement to support stability in a 
dozen different theatres simultaneously, and to 
engage with both unconventional and conventional 
threats. The first task for the UK is to ensure that it is 
able to engage as part of a broad coalition or alliance in 
tackling these threats (which are beyond the scope 
of any one country).  In particular, the UK must build on 
its strong alliance with the United States, and ensure 
that European NATO allies are operating at maximum 
effectiveness.  It must use its leadership position in NATO 
to ensure that NATO has the full spectrum of conventional 
forces, trained, exercised, and psychologically prepared to 
defend the European order against a conventional threat.
House of Commons Defence Committee Tenth Report 
of Session 17 March 2015
”
“
People respond in accordance to how you relate to them.  
If you approach them on the basis of violence, that’s 
how they’ll react.  But if you say, ‘We want peace, we 
want stability’, we can then do a lot of things that will 
contribute towards the progress of our society.
Nelson Mandela”
“
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 33
2
Section 1 – The role of the state in maintaining stability
Chapter 2 – Understanding 
stability and instability
2.1. Crises and conflicts between states have, through recent history, been 
addressed through an international system based on the centrality of the state, 
set and codified through the United Nations (UN).  The post-1945 international 
organisational structure was designed primarily to address inter-state challenges and 
disputes but this construct has struggled to deal with the complexity of intra-state 
violence and instability – particularly in instances where a state was unwilling or 
unable to manage its own internal conflict. 
2.2. Globalisation is an accelerating process that 
projects social, political and economic activities 
across frontiers, and from one region to another.  
In so doing, it accelerates the flow of ideas and 
information, goods, capital/finance and populations.  
Essentially globalisation is the process of extending a 
matrix of social relations – of production, commerce, 
communication, culture and ideology, legislation and 
jurisdiction, organisation and the ability to project 
power across international borders.  The effects 
of globalisation on instability can be both positive 
and negative.  While not a cause of conflict in itself, 
globalisation brings:
• increasingly contested legal authority 
between sovereign and non-state bodies;
• ubiquitous access to information; 
• increased population migration, widespread 
proliferation of weapons, together with virtually untraceable financial flows, 
which can provide non-state actors with a destructive power and reach 
approaching that held by some smaller ‘traditional’ states; and
‘The state is the principal unit for exercising 
public authority in defined territories in 
modern times.  It is also the central structure 
in international relations.  The state consists 
of: institutions or rules which regulate 
political, social and economic engagement 
across a territory and determine how 
public authority is obtained and used (for 
example, constitutions, laws, customs) and 
organisations at the national and the 
sub-national level which operate within 
those rules (for example, the executive, 
legislature, judiciary, bureaucracy, ministries, 
army, tax authorities).’
Building Peaceful States and Societies
Department for International Development 
(DFID)
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 34
2
• complex networks connecting diaspora s and communities of interest that 
cause local shocks or events to reverberate and multiply rapidly at the global 
level and influence local events elsewhere.  
Globalisation makes the possibility of discrete, localised conflict increasingly unlikely.  
Instead, globalisation can result in a plethora of complex, inter-connected threats 
involving a range of state and non-state actors.
2.3. In parallel with globalisation, a ne w international emphasis relating to the 
primacy of human security led to the UN’s adoption of the Responsibility to Protect 
(R2P) in 2005.  This allows the international community to overrule the principle of 
state sovereignty to prevent gross breaches of human rights, such as the threat to 
the population of Benghazi and Eastern Libya posed by Gadhafi in 201 1.  However, 
this principle can itself challenge stability, by providing the opportunity for regional 
powers to claim legitimacy for interventions in other states, such as Russia’s 
involvement in Ukraine.
2.4. Beyond the direct control of a state but impacting upon its stability, are the 
geopolitical factors of the region, which include:  
• freedom of movement;
• trade;
• availability of resources;
• regional stability; and
• the activities of neighbouring states.  
It is not uncommon for neighbouring states or groups to provide financial and 
materiel support to local non-state armed groups, either to secure regional 
strategic advantage or deflect threats to themselves.  The overspill of violence 
and mass migration of refugees from regional conflicts can create or exacerbate 
internal tensions and further stretch a state’s security sector.  Transnational criminal 
groups, such as drug cartels, also seek to exploit 
insecurity.  A state’s inability to manage these types 
of external pressures can accelerate its downward 
spiral towards instability.  It follows that analysing a 
region’s geopolitics will often help intervening bodies 
understand the different political interests and frictions 
within the conflict area.  
2.5. Within the constraints of these external factors, 
the stability of a state stands in direct proportion to 
the perceived legitimacy and effectiveness of the 
‘Government refers to the specific 
administration in power at any one 
moment (the governing coalition of 
political leaders), while the state is the 
basis for a government’s authority, 
legality, and claim to popular support.’  
Building Peaceful States and Societies
DFID
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 35
2
government.  The degree of actual control exercised by a government over its 
institutions and organisations can vary significantly across different countries and 
governance can be particularly complex in fragile and conflict affected states.  An 
important element of a government’s behaviour is the way in which it uses state 
institutions and organisations to exert control.  The extent to which this behaviour is 
viewed as legitimate by other elites, and the wider population, is critical for stability.  
Predictable and equitable use of power will tend to gain support whereas arbitrary 
manipulation of access to justice and formal governance can be used as a tool to 
apply pressure to sections of a population in a manner which fosters grievance.
2.6. Deficits in perceived legitimacy and effectiveness will create varying degrees 
of instability that give space for both internal and external political, economic and 
ideological spoilers.  Figure 2.1 shows this stability spectrum.33
Figure 2.1 – Stability spectrum 
2.7. Populations have historically accepted the state’s right to exert a monopoly 
of the legitimate use of force in return for providing security and justice.34  This 
obligation has driven the state’s need and right to tax its population.  This process is a 
33 International Stabilisation Assistance Force, Provincial Reconstruction Team Handbook , Edition 3, 
page 8.
34  Max Weber, Politics as a Vocation, published in H H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills Trans., & eds, 1946.  From 
Max Weber: Essays in Sociology , (Oxford University Press; Oxford) and Max Weber (1921), Wirtschaft und 
Gesellschaft; 1919.
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 36
2
key part of developing the inclusive political representation of the population35 from 
which the Western democratic model of legitimacy is derived.
2.8. In fragile states, such as Afghanistan, leaders may have access to non-tax based 
revenue streams.  These may be derived internally from primary commodities and 
illicit goods as well as externally from international aid, support for proxy wars by 
regional and international actors and ideologically driven funding.  These rents have 
reduced the need for governments to develop systems of taxation and therefore 
develop accountable and representative political relationships with the population 
they claim to govern.
2.9. Some states, Gadhafi’s Libya for inst ance, achieve stability through ruthless 
oppression combined with state subsidies, nepotism36 and patronage.  In such 
states, stability is usually reliant on individuals rather than institutions, lacks 
resilience and is vulnerable to corruption and exploitation by powerful actors.  
However, where oppressive states have access to sufficient resources, they may prove 
to be long-lasting, as they are able to offset the high transactional costs imposed 
by their relative illegitimacy.  It follows that malign actors, who challenge the state 
and its associated apparatus, may be motivated by the desire for redress in resource 
distribution or the simple capture of power.
2.10. Our Government recognises that the existence of an effective state system 
is integral to international stability.  However, the state as a specific entity can 
sometimes present a particular issue for UK engagement because certain regimes 
may pursue political agendas which are not compatible with international standards 
or UK national interests and expectations.  An example of this is the Syrian regime 
which, together with supporting elites, declared an overt interest in preserving 
‘stability’ while simultaneously employing seemingly indiscriminate violence against 
significant portions of its population.  Conversely, in some very fragile situations 
(for example, Somalia), the absence of a functioning regime (even a repressive one), 
has resulted in a total failure of the state.  In such circumstances, even a regime that 
maybe does not match the UK’s expected standards of governance may be better 
than nothing.  Any stability created in the absence of a broader political system and 
under-pinning state structure is likely to be only temporary.  However, it may still be a 
worthwhile short-term objective to set the conditions for a better long-term goal.
35  Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1762), The Social Contract ; see also Thomas Hobbes (1651), Leviathan (for a 
rather bleaker view of the role of the state and elites); Charles Tilly (1992), Coercion, Capital, and European 
States, AD 990-1992, (Blackwell; Oxford).
36  Nepotism is defined as: the favouring of relatives or friends, especially by giving them jobs.  Concise 
Oxford English Dictionary, 2011.
Our 
Government 
recognises that 
the existence 
of an effective 
state system 
is integral to 
international 
stability. 
”
“
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 37
2
Legal requirements
2.1 1. Strictly adhering to the fundamental principles of the Law of Armed Conflict 
(military necessity, humanity, distinction (or discrimination) and proportionality) is 
essential to promote legitimacy in stabilisation campaigns.  Applicable human rights 
laws and UK policy must also be adhered to.  There may also be good political or 
military reasons for exercising a greater degree of self-restraint in the use of force than 
is legally required.
2.12.  Corruption.  Corruption can be described as the abuse of entrusted power 
for private gain and can take many forms, ranging from demanding bribes for safe 
passage on the streets to non-meritocratic awards of jobs.  Corrupt practices in 
defence and security institutions are particularly harmful, as they affect institutions 
which are mandated to provide security and which should have the monopoly 
on the use of force.  Corrupt defence forces can contribute to insecurity instead of 
tackling it, and can prey on the population they are supposed to protect.  Institutional 
structures weakened by corruption might not withstand the challenges of insecurity, 
which then progressively undermines the domestic legitimacy of indigenous defence 
forces.  Perceptions of international troops, if they work with such forces, can be 
adversely affected by association and their ability to achieve stabilisation goals 
might be diminished.  The presence and actions of international forces can also have 
unforeseen consequences and provide opportunities for corruption, for example, 
by providing a security umbrella under which corrupt activities are conducted.  
Association with corrupt institutions can undermine domestic support for the mission 
within contributing states. 
2.13. The mandate.  The mandate provides the legal framework to conduct 
operations.  It also provides direction on freedom of action and constraints. 
Commanders may find it helpful to list the activities that they intend to conduct and 
consider whether the mandate they have to operate under supports them.  Where it 
does not, they should seek amendments to increase their freedom of action, while 
limiting that of the adversary.
2.14. Status of the force.  The legal responsibilities for the force must be established 
to ensure rapid, transparent measures are in place to deal with adverse incidents.  
Any perception that international forces are above the law and can act with impunity 
will erode legitimacy, both in the eyes of the host nation and the international 
community, and promote the wrong attitude among troops in theatre.  Thus, the 
Section 2 – Legitimacy
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 38
2
legal status of coalition forces and relationships with indigenous military and police 
forces and the host nation legal system is vital.  Such legal status must also be 
clearly established at all levels from governmental to tactical.  Recognition of where 
primacy in law enforcement rests is critical, as is keeping interested parties informed 
of any actions taken, while maintaining an understanding of the local legal system.  
Wherever possible, UK actions must support the host nation rule of law and legal 
system.  UK support should be conditional upon adhering to accepted norms and 
encourage the host nation to abide by, and enforce, its international obligations. 
The authority of the host government
2.15. To alter the conflict relationship in favour of the host government, that 
government must establish and sustain authority and legitimacy.  This authority – 
sometimes referred to as ‘campaign authority’ – is dependent upon the successful 
amalgamation and interplay of four factors.37
a. Mandate.  The perceived legitimacy of the mandate that establishes a state 
authority, whether through the principles of universal suffrage, or a recognised 
and accepted caste/tribal model.
b. Manner.  The perceived legitimacy of the way in which those exercising the 
mandate conduct themselves, both individually and collectively.
c. Consent.  The extent to which factions, local populations and others 
consent to, comply with, or resist the authority of those exercising the 
mandate.  Consent, or its absence, may range from freely given support, 
through unwilling compliance, to active resistance.
d. Expectations.  The extent to which the expectations and aspirations 
of factions, local populations and others are managed or are met by those 
exercising the mandate.
2.16. Within the international and regional  context, our Government has described 
structural stability in a state as having ‘political systems which are representative and 
legitimate, capable of managing conflict, change and other pressure (both internal 
and external) peacefully.  This means societies in which human rights and rule of law 
37  See also Joint Warfare Publication (JWP) 3-50, The Military Contribution to Peace Support Operations,  
2nd Edition, dated June 2004, page 214.
Section 3 – The elements of a stable state
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 39
2
Security
Political settlement
Governance 
and rule of law
Societal
relationships
Regional and external influences
Social 
and economic 
development
are respected, basic needs are met, 
security established and opportunities 
for social and economic development 
are open to all.’38
2.17. Security, governance and the 
rule of law, and social and economic 
development are inextricably linked 
– stability is generally determined 
by how they interact.  Critically, this 
interaction is held together by societal 
relationships, influenced by regional 
and external factors and enabled by 
an overarching political settlement.39
Figure 2.2 illustrates this relationship.
2.18. Security has been shown to be a primary factor in forming and maintaining a 
state’s legitimacy.
a. Within democratic states, human security, which requires meeting the 
legitimate political, economic, societal and environmental needs of individuals 
and groups,40 is equally important to protecting the state from both external 
and internal threats, in pursuit of national security.41
b. Other security models do exist.  One of the most common is the autocratic 
model, in which the state ruthlessly uses the security sector simply to protect 
its interests.  In these cases, the government will often be the perpetrator 
of significant violence against its own people and will invariably fail to 
deliver some aspects of human security.  This may fuel discontent but, with 
a compelling narrative and sufficient resources, may still achieve a degree of 
legitimacy.
In either model, a viable security sector is crucial to sustain effective governance, and 
maintain law and order.  A poorly managed or dysfunctional security sector hampers 
development, discourages investment and may perpetuate poverty.
2.19. One of the defining features of state fragility is a breakdown in security, with 
failure of the security sector and loss of the state’s monopoly on the legitimate use of 
force.  In such circumstances, malign actors may exploit insecurity, by:
38  Building Stability Overseas Strategy , page 5, 2011.
39  This relationship is covered in the final part of this section.
40  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine , paragraphs 1.2 – 1.4.
41  Ibid., paragraph 1.1.
Figure 2.2 – The stable state model 
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 40
2
• inflicting further violence;
• establishing parallel security and governance structures; or
• undertaking widespread criminal activity.
These activities can undermine the confidence of the population in the government’s 
ability to protect and sustain them.
2.20. Governance and the rule of law requires an effective and responsive 
governance structure that can manage how public services are delivered, permits the 
peaceful resolution of internal contests for power and resources, civil disputes and 
ensures fair access to justice.  
a. Stable governance can only endure  when there is sufficient security 
and, in general, where influence is exercised over a population and territory.  
The methods used to achieve such influence must be viewed as sufficiently 
legitimate by a significant majority of those being governed.
b. Some version of a rule of law is fundamental to stability but the form will 
vary depending upon the social, cultural and political context of a particular 
society.42  Legitimacy is ultimately defined by the local population, based 
on their perception, expectations and experiences, rather than by externally 
imposed criteria.
c. Areas outside the reach or control of state authorities can be havens for 
malign activity.  Spoiler groups seek to exploit weak governance so they 
can establish their own governance and, sometimes arbitrary, systems of 
justice.  They do this to enhance their own legitimacy as well as their political, 
ideological or criminal activities.
d. In many states, corruption among government officials is endemic, due to 
greed, need or under the influence of powerful political or non-state actors.  
Corruption can be political, underpinning the overall distribution of power 
and resources within a state and empowering some groups at the expense of 
others.  This is often a cause of instability which can undermine the economy 
and the trust in government.  Attempts to tackle corruption often encounter 
resistance and will require a properly integrated civil-military approach.43  
In cases where corruption is prevalent this does not indicate widespread 
acceptance among the population and it must be tackled.  Corrupt practices, 
42  This may include informal as well as formal justice systems.  See Policy Approach to Rule of Law, 
Department for International Development (DFID), 2013.   https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/306396/policy-approach-rule-of-law.pdf
43 The Building Integrity UK Programme seeks to reduce this impact by working in partnership with 
Transparency International.
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 41
2
forced by circumstances, frequently remain unpalatable to those affected by, 
or even engaged in them: for example, being regularly forced to pay bribes at 
police checkpoints does not make the practice any less humiliating over time. 
2.21. Social and economic development is fundamental to stability.  All states 
experience economic problems from time to time but the effectiveness of the state 
in managing these problems, keeping pace with societal demands and avoiding 
perceptions of discrimination will help determine the perceived legitimacy of that 
government in all societies.
a. Many so-called ‘developing states’ are confronted by semi-permanent 
economic problems.  These are problems in which unemployment, inflation 
and competition for resources provide a breeding ground for conflict.  They 
are, therefore, vulnerable to economic shocks.
b. In such states, unemployment and underemployment are likely to be high 
and the basic functions44 normally provided by the state may depend upon 
substantial international aid.  Such aid can be both financial and functional, 
with international and non-governmental 
organisations directly delivering public services 
which, wrongly presented, can further degrade the 
legitimacy of the state.  
c. Rents from rich primary resources can be a 
source of motivation for state and non-state actors, 
both internal and external, who seek to control 
potential revenue.  For example, the trade in 
diamonds in Sierra Leone and Angola.45
d. Economic development and aid can also be a 
source of instability as it will invariably benefit some 
regions and individuals who are best placed to take 
advantage of it rather than those in greatest need.46  
This can be exacerbated by the perception, or 
reality, of corruption and discriminatory economic 
systems, which often exist in fragile states.
44  Note that in many conflict affected states the expectation of what constitutes ‘basic functions’ will be 
significantly lower than for Western norms.
45  Philippe Le Billon, Fuelling War: Natural Resources and Armed Conflicts , Adelphi Paper 373, (London: 
Routledge for IISS), 2001; Wars of Plunder: Conflicts, Profits and the Politics of Resources (London: Hurst 
Ltd) 2012; Michael L. Ross Oil, Drugs and Diamonds: How do Natural Resources Vary in their Impact on Civil 
War? in Beyond Greed and Grievance: The Political Economy of Armed Conflict, Karen Ballentine and Jake 
Sherman eds. (Boulder: Lynne Rienner) 2003. 
46  Brown, M. E.(ed), The international Dimensions of Internal Conflict  (London: MIT Press) 1996.
‘The population consists of a range 
of social groups within a geographic 
area and is likely to be heterogeneous.  
Populations will encompass a variety 
of different castes, ethnicities, tribes, 
social categories and interest groups.  
The differing viewpoints, perspectives 
and specific groups’ contributions to 
stabilisation (for example, men, women, 
children and the elderly) will need to be 
carefully considered and understood.  
The population will always be a key 
component of stability; not least because 
its broad consent (or willingness) to be 
governed is a fundamental requirement 
for long-term stability.’
DFID
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 42
2
2.22. Economic collapse can cause, or be caused by, breakdown in other elements of 
a stable state and will be marked by:
• infrastructure failure;
• no effective taxation by the state;
• increasing reliance on international aid;
• rising unemployment; and
• increasing vulnerability to natural disasters.
2.23. Societal relationships.  As well as the functional elements, it is important to 
recognise that most states are held together by social, cultural and ideological factors.  
These factors, such as identity, symbolism, ethos and culture, are less tangible but 
changing perceptions of these popular understandings may be a key to maintaining 
or breaking a state. 
a. In a stable state, nationalism or ethn ic, tribal, caste and sectarian solidarity 
can evoke compassion, pride and a sense of loyalty and shared identity.  Such 
responses serve as a positive force for human cooperation, tending to be 
broadly consistent with the manner in which state institutions discharge their 
responsibilities and gain the population’s consent. 
b. Conversely, these factors can foster 
ethnic tensions and create divisions 
between groups.  In a failing state, 
perceived economic inequalities as 
well as ethnic, tribal and ideological 
discrimination will breakdown societal 
relationships.  In parallel, group 
identities can provide an organisational 
framework for mobilising individuals 
towards violence. 
2.24. Gender perspectives.  Conflict 
affects women, men, girls and boys 
differently.  It is important to analyse the 
implications of conflict and stabilisation 
activities in each specific context.  In 
some societies or countries, females 
may be particularly vulnerable to abuse, 
gender specific corruption, exploitation 
and exclusion.  This can be exacerbated 
in fragile and conflict-affected states, 
Understanding stability and instability
WoWomen shshhhooouuldldldd plaaay y aa popopop sissittit ve rrrrololllolo eee ththhththrrororoouguguguguguggghohohohoututututuuu sssssoooococcocieieieietytytyty

JDP 05 43
2
where: key infrastructure has been destroyed; existing (often limited) protective 
legislation and social networks are disrupted; and insecurity or societal tradition limits 
female participation in decision-making forums.  
a. When attempting to build stability, it is important to understand the 
particular viewpoints, needs and challenges of women and girls.  Wherever 
possible, these should be taken into consideration throughout. 
b. The UK National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security states that: 
‘women’s participation is needed to make and build peace and prevent conflict 
breaking out’.47  The plan recognises that sometimes women and girls suffer 
from specific forms of violence in conflict and emergencies which will need 
to be addressed as part of any stabilisation effort.  The four pillars of the UK 
National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security are: 
 o participation of women in peace processes and decision-making;
 o prevention of conflict and violence against women and girls; 
 o protecting the human rights of women and girls; and
 o addressing women’s and girls’ need in relief and recovery.
Our Government has placed particular emphasis on the Preventing Sexual Violence 
Initiative which seeks to eradicate gender-based violence within conflicts.  The 
positive significance of women filling key roles throughout society should also be 
taken into consideration.
The importance of the political settlement
2.25. A critical component for any stable state is an 
effective political settlement in which the legitimacy 
of the state is sufficiently accepted to avoid violent 
conflict.  Legitimacy can arise from the: performance 
of institutions; character (and especially the perceived 
fairness and predictability) of their decision-making 
and selection processes; or their conformity with a 
community’s wider religious or social values.  
a. The Department for International 
Development (DFID) describe political 
settlements as ‘the expression of a common 
understanding, usually forged between elites, 
47  Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), UK National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security  
2014 – 2017.
‘The elite in any society includes a range 
of individuals or groups who hold either 
local or national leadership positions on the 
basis of wealth and/or social identity.  Elites 
play a significant role in maintaining order 
and stability through using their resources 
and power to exert influence which may 
be both positive and negative.  Critically, in 
the context of violent political conflict, they 
are often leaders within armed groups or, 
conversely, the targets of opposing groups.’  
Stabilisation Unit
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 44
2
about how power is organised and exercised’.48  This is essentially a ‘horizontal’ 
bargain between elites over access to power and resources, which will be a 
product of the local political economy.49 
b. In environments where state security organisations are weak and 
incapable of exercising a monopoly of legitimate force, bargains between the 
state and elites are often central to maintaining order. 
c. While formal and informal power-sharing mechanisms can make an 
important contribution to ending conflicts and short-term stability, they can 
move power away from formal, democratic institutions into arrangements 
which are less accountable and potentially divisive.50 
2.26. To achieve greater resilience, settlements need to be open to, and inclusive 
of, wider society.  In other words, a ‘vertical’ settlement between the government 
and institutions of state and wider society, about the responsibilities of the state, 
and the scope and limits of its power.  Open political and economic institutions 
associated with vertical settlements are generally considered as central to economic 
development and prosperity (and hence long-term stability).51  Their contribution 
to short-term resilience, and more narrow understandings of stability (for example, 
containing violence), however, is less clear.  Evidence of their importance for security 
and stability is sketchy, though their potential importance is underlined by the 
character of the protests during the Arab Spring.52
2.27. It is useful to consider how each of the main groups considered previously 
relate to stability.  These groups are not discrete entities and individuals can be part of 
more than one group.  Equally, the groups are not homogeneous and may comprise a 
mix of genders, ages, religions and ethnicity, caste, tribal and social identities.  
2.28. Figure 2.3 shows that the political settlement can be seen as a function of the 
connections between key actors and the degree to which the various groups within 
the elites and population confer legitimacy on the regime and state institutions 
to govern their lives.  Creating such connections is not easy, but once made, these 
connections do create and help maintain stability. 
48  DFID, Building Peaceful States and Societies : a practice paper, 2010.
49  Essentially the interaction of political and economic processes in a society: the distribution of 
power and wealth between different groups and individuals, and the processes that create, sustain and 
transform these relationships over time.  Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
50  Dennys C, Pounds N, and Zaum D: HPRT Transition Lessons Study: Stabilisation Unit, 2012.
51  Douglas North et al, Limited Access Orders in the Developing World: A New Approach in the Problems of 
Development, Policy Research working paper, WPS 4359, (Washington; World Bank), 2007.
52 Arab Spring refers to the democratic uprisings that arose independently and spread across the Arab 
world in 2011.  The movement originated in Tunisia in December 2010 and quickly took hold in Egypt, 
Libya, Syria, Yemen, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and Jordan.
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 45
2
2.29. State resilience.  One of the key indicators of a genuinely stable state is the 
ability to avoid, and deal with, strategic shocks – in other words, its level of resilience.  
Shocks could come about through events such as: 
• violence (either from within that state itself or from external intervention/
contagion); 
• as the result of a major natural disaster;
• mass inflows of refugees;
• economic downturns; or 
• contests for the transition of power.53
Shocks can result in the degradation or collapse of one, or more, of the elements 
required for stability.  Weakness in any one element could lead to the erosion and 
subsequent failure of another.  Where insecurity and conflict are not already present, 
this erosion can set the conditions for it to occur and may result in a fracture of the 
political settlement that regulates key societal and state relationships.  Contextual 
variations notwithstanding, a fragile state could rapidly break down as shown in 
Figure 2.4.
53  Bremmer I, The J Curve (Simon and Schuster; New York), 2006.
Figure 2.3 – Stability relies on mutually reinforcing relationships between three key actors
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 46
2
Negative external influence
•  Breakdown in regional security
•  Lack of freedom of movement and trade
•  Economic contagion
•  Increased vulnerability to shocks
Breakdown in security
•  Widespread organised crime
•  Failure of host-nation security institutions
•  Rise in malign actors
•  Risk of state failure
Societal disintegration
•  Rise in tension between
   groups (ethnic, tribal,
   religious)
•  Horizontal inequality
Economic collapse
•  Destruction of infrastructure
•  Rise of black market and inability of 
   government to collect revenue
•  Rising unemployment and dependence
   on aid
•  Increased potential for humanitarian crises
Failure of state institutions
•  Loss of government monopoly on legitimate
   use of violence
•  Endemic corruption in formal and informal
   governance
•  Arbitrary application of justice
Security
Political             settlement
Governance 
and rule of law
Societal
relationships
Regional and external influences
Social 
and economic 
development
Figure 2.4 – Breakdown of the stable-state model
Conflict is a normal part of human interaction, the natural result when 
individuals and groups have incompatible needs, interests or beliefs.  The 
challenge we need to address is the violent conflict that emerges when these 
underlying incompatibilities are badly managed.
Building Stability Overseas Strategy
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 47
2
Section 4 – Instability and violent conflict
2.30. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine classifies the 
relations between factions within a state, and between state and non-state actors as 
being cooperation, confrontation or conflict.54  In stable, resilient societies, discord is 
normally managed through formal and informal institutions: 
• elections may be used to determin e the outcome of political argument; 
• courts settle legal disputes; 
• social norms and the state’s monopoly on using force, prevent 
disagreements between neighbours escalating into violent conflict; and
• religious and civil institutions or leaders can also shape how societies 
behave and react.  
These mechanisms both address and resolve disputes thereby avoiding recourse to 
violence and facilitating positive change.  
2.31. By contrast, in fragile states or sy stems, which are often weak and perceived 
as illegitimate or inherently dysfunctional, cooperation will breakdown, leading to 
confrontation and, if not contained, to conflict.  In this circumstance, the ability of 
non-armed civil groups to act is constrained and violence becomes a rational course 
of action to resolve disputes and gain control of resources.55
2.32. The motives for committing violent ac ts often include irrational, cultural or 
ideological factors.  Such factors, however, cannot explain all of the social dynamics 
involved in the insurgents’ decision-making process.56
2.33. A successful insurgency or terrorist campaign demonstrates through violent 
action the failure of the state it opposes, without alienating either its core or potential 
supporters.  The failed insurgency fades into obscurity when the violence committed 
by its supporters alienates the population and increases support for the beleaguered 
regime.57  Equally, inappropriate or excessive use of force by the state will further 
54  JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine , paragraph 1.48.
55  Cramer C, Civil War is not a Stupid Thing: Accounting for Violence in Developing Countries  (London: 
Hurst), 2006.
56  Strong P , Modelling the ‘Violence Paradox’ in Irregular Warfare and Terrorism , Cornwallis Group XVI 
Conference 2011, page 2-5, 2011.
57  Bagwell M, Dudin S, Discretion Analysis, DSTL/CR67014v3.0 (R), 2012.
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 48
2
undermine perceptions of its legitimacy both internally and externally and fuel 
violence.  The recent actions of the regime in Syria are a good example of this.
Causes of violent conflict
2.34. Containing confrontation and preventing conflict is an integral part of crisis 
management.58  To achieve this successfully, a clear understanding of the causes of 
violent conflict is required.  Conflicts can sometimes be categorised into specific 
‘type’ and given titles such as: state-on-state, intra-state, proxy or hybrid.  But this 
approach can be misleading.  The causes of intra-state violent conflict are rarely 
straightforward but in general they can be divided into two broad groups:
• underlying structural causes which create the conditions for conflict; and
• dynamic or proximate causes which trigger violence.
2.35. Underlying causes will generally relate  to issues such as, ‘social, political or 
economic exclusion based on ethnicity, religion or gender or unequal power relations 
between the centre and periphery’59 or cross-border influences.  Conflict is most 
likely to escalate to violence where political elites are vulnerable, group histories are 
antagonistic and domestic economic problems are mounting, with the majority of 
internal conflicts triggered by internal elite-level factors.  There are three main types 
of internal elite-level factors: 
• ideological (to change the state); 
• criminal assaults on state sovereignty (primarily driven by economic 
motivation); and 
• power struggles (driven by personal political motivations or a desire to 
control and allocate resources).60  
2.36. Conflict will sometimes occur betwee n easily identifiable and clearly defined 
sides but will more likely be part of a complex network of indistinct groups, each 
driven by a disparate variety of goals, methods and tactics.  Boundaries between 
different groups are usually blurred by fluid membership and multiple allegiances 
which may not be overtly aligned with national boundaries.  Sometimes, even 
members of the extant government may transition into, and out of, irregular 
58  Op. Cit., JDP 0-01, paragraph 1.52.
59  DFID, Building Peaceful States and Societies : a practice paper, page 14.
60  Azar, E, The Management of Protracted Social Conflict , (Aldershot: Hampshire) 1990; Brown, M. E.(ed) 
The International Dimensions of Internal Conflict  (London: MIT Press) 1996; Wallensteen P , Understanding 
Conflict Resolution  (London: Sage) 2002.
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 49
2
groups thereby confusing linkages between political power and illicit activity and 
undermining effective governance and the rule of law.  Causes and motivations will 
vary considerably.  Some may be truly political, altruistic and positive, while others will 
be the result of resentment, victimhood, clan loyalty, ideology or criminality.  These 
latter causes will invariably be both negative and destabilising.
2.37. States tend to enter into war for their own reasons (interests) rather than 
on behalf of their citizens.  Although many states do ostensibly align themselves 
to global security issues, such as climate change, poverty and energy shortages, 
it is more likely that any interaction outside their own borders will be guided by 
realpolitik61 and strategic national interests.  The process by which decision-makers 
assess the necessity of conflict is subjective, difficult to predict, and governed by a 
range of complex political, organisational and psychological factors.  One of the 
key constraints on a leader's perceived discretion is the belief that a state must 
uphold its self-professed image as a 'player' in a region or conflict.  These can lead 
decision-makers to believe that conflict is unavoidable when, in fact, alternatives do 
exist, or when military action is not the optimal approach.62
Conflict analysis
2.38. No two conflicts are the same and interactions between the key groups 
will vary from country to country and in different environments.  The degree of 
relevance, or influence of, a particular group towards creating stability will also vary.  
For example, considerations about the overriding need for elite deals in Helmand 
in Afghanistan, rather than attaining the broad-based consent of the population 
may not necessarily be applicable to Egypt.  Consequently, it is not possible to 
argue each stabilisation intervention should have an exclusively population, state or 
elite-centric focus and therefore approaches to stabilisation must be tailored to the 
context.  Decisions on the appropriate ways to approach such crises will be political 
but the military must understand and engage in integrated analysis which will likely 
determine whether, or not, a particular strategy will succeed.  
61  Realpolitik is defined as: politics based on practical rather than moral or ideological considerations.  
Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 2011.
62  Op. Cit., Bagwell M, Dudin S.
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 50
2
2.39. Shared understanding is the key.  This  can only be realised through a detailed 
examination and analysis of the specific context and the main contributing factors.63
a. It is vital to look not only at th e immediate or 'presenting' problem, but 
also at underlying issues and at the structure of relationships within the 
society.  In other words, an intervening force needs to address the causes and 
effects of conflict and fragility and this will require an integrated approach. 64
b. There are a number of models that can assist us to understand the context 
but the primary tool employed across our Government is the Joint Assessment 
of Conflict and Stability.  This cross-government approach aims to build 
consensus on a shared understanding of the conflict drivers and provide a 
base for integrated planning, policy and resource allocation.  The hub for the 
Joint Assessment of Conflict and Stability is the Stabilisation Unit.
2.40. As well as being varied, environments affected by violent conflict will 
transform over time because conflict is a dynamic process, in which the original 
intentions of the actors involved are shaped by their own activities and, equally 
importantly, those of their adversaries.65  It follows that integrated analysis of a 
conflict must be regularly revisited.
Conflict resolution
2.41. As stated previously, an inclusive political settlement is required to build and 
maintain stability.  
63  Evans W and Marston C, The Policy and Evidence Context for Addressing Fragile States , Dstl/CR50813v1.0 
(R) 2011.
64  DFID, Building Peaceful States and Societies : a practice paper, 2010; Lederach, J. P., The Little Book of 
Conflict Transformation (Intercourse PA: Good Books) 2003.
65  Strachan H, The Direction of War (Cambridge University Press) 2013.
An inclusive 
political 
settlement 
is required 
to build and 
maintain 
stability.
”
“
Understanding stability and instability
ShShShShShShhShSShaaraarararaaa edededededdddd uuuuuuuuundndndndndndndndererrerrererstststttanananannaaaa dididididididddd ngnggngngngng iiissss sssss ononononnonnone e eeeeeeee ofofofofofffofff tttttttthehehehehehehehehehee kkkkkkkkeyeyeeyeyeeyeysss totototototott ssssstattattttt bibibibibibbibb lilililiiiisasssasasatitititititionononononononnn

JDP 05 51
2
The 
government’s 
narrative 
must be 
demonstrably 
consistent with 
the aspirations 
of the 
population.
”
“
a. When attempting to move from a situation of armed conflict towards a 
non-violent political alternative, elites are a critical component for securing 
agreement.
b. Deliberately excluding elites is unlikely to produce a successful or 
sustainable political process.  The likelihood of violence reoccurring will be 
high.66  
c. Any stabilisation plan must recognise the importance of including relevant 
elites.  It should be acknowledged, however, that some of the elites involved 
may have interests or objectives that do not necessarily align with those of the 
UK or our allies. 
d. Shared understanding of what can, and cannot, be compromised must be 
established before negotiation begins. 
2.42. Narrative.  Competing elites will often seek to adopt persuasive causes, based 
on the real, underlying problems or unresolved contradictions that are inherent 
within most societies to mobilise support.  They will try to situate their activities 
within a compelling narrative that attempts to explain and justify their actions while 
simultaneously de-legitimising the motivations and behaviours of their opponents.  
Creating a complex and convincing narrative often involves manipulating their 
identity to create belief in an ‘us versus them’ situation.  The government’s narrative 
must, therefore, be demonstrably consistent with the aspirations of the population 
and, crucially, it must also be more compelling than that of competing actors.  Most 
importantly, it must be enacted, and be seen to be enacted; word and deed must 
be overtly and unambiguously aligned both by government organisations and any 
external security force operating to support a host government.
2.43. Finally, a successful political settlement needs to be institutionalised in some 
form of political organisation that has the capacity both to:
• ensure that the state (or more prec isely the government) upholds the rules 
of the settlement and does not turn on or exclude individual members; and 
• prevent defections and cheating. 
When this does not happen, violent conflict will quickly re-emerge. 67  
66  Darb, J. and Mac Gint, R,  Contemporary Peacemaking: Conflict Violence and Peace Processes (London; 
Palgrave-Macmillan) 2003.
67  Di John J and Putzel J, Political Settlements, Issue Paper , Birmingham, GSDRC, 2009.
Understanding stability and instability

 JDP 05 52
2
Key points 
• Globalisation makes the possibility of discrete, localised conflict increasingly 
unlikely.  Instead, globalisation can result in a plethora of complex, inter-connected 
threats involving a range of state and non-state actors.
• The stability of a state stands in direct proportion to the perceived legitimacy and 
effectiveness of the government. 
• Strictly adhering to the fundamental pr inciples of the Law of Armed Conflict 
(military necessity, humanity, distinction (or discrimination) and proportionality) is 
essential to promote legitimacy in stabilisation campaigns.
• Security, governance and the rule of law, and social and economic development are 
inextricably linked – stability is generally determined by how they interact.  
• A viable security sector is crucial to sustain effective governance, and maintain law 
and order.
• A critical component for any stable stat e is an effective political settlement in 
which the legitimacy of the state is sufficiently accepted to avoid violent conflict. 
• One of the key indicators of a genuinely stable state is the ability to avoid, and 
deal with, strategic shocks – in other words, its level of resilience.
• Conflict affects women and men differen tly so it is important to analyse the 
implications of conflict and stabilisation activities in each specific context.
• The causes of intra-state violent conflict are rarely straightforward.
• No two conflicts are the same and interactions between the key groups will vary 
from country to country and in different environments. 
• Any stabilisation plan must recognise the importance of including relevant elites. 
• The government’s narrative must be demonstrably consistent with the aspirations 
of the population and, crucially, it must also be more compelling than that of 
competing actors. 
• A successful political settlement needs to be institutionalised in some form of 
political organisation.
Understanding stability and instability

JDP 05 53
2
Notes
Understanding stability and instability

[Page 64: No extractable text]

JDP X-XX (X Edition)
Ends, ways and 
means
Chapter 3 focuses on the key policies and strategies 
related to stabilisation and considers how they can 
be delivered by the military as part of an integrated 
approach.  This chapter considers the main instruments 
of national power, some of the key organisations involved 
with stabilisation and how stabilisation activities are 
resourced.
Chapter 3
55
3
JDP 05
Section 1 – Ends.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  58
Section 2 – Ways   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  60
Section 3 – Means   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  68
Section 4 – The UK Government’s integrated 
                       planning mechanisms  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  77

 JDP 05 56
3
”
“
”
“Democracies are expense-averse and they think in terms 
of short-term, political interests rather than a long-term 
interest in stability.
Samantha Power
US Ambassador to the UN 
March 2015
All this will, in turn, require a much deeper understanding 
of alien political contexts, effective defence relationships 
with host governments, and the knowledge and 
confidence to respond rapidly and precisely to prevent 
an escalation.  The new Force Structure will have to reflect 
this in education and training, the relationship with other 
government departments, a new appetite for uncertainty 
and risk, and the use of conventional military power not as 
an alternative to but as a support for political solutions.
House of Commons Defence Committee Tenth Report 
of Session 17 March 2015
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 57
3
3.1. The UK’s response to global instability and conflict is to consider and apply, 
where appropriate, all of the instruments of national power to shape the global 
environment and tackle potential risks at source.  This may require overseas military 
operations and recognises that security is often a prerequisite for political and 
economic progress.  Therefore, the UK, often alongside international partners, 
maintains the ability to respond swiftly and decisively across a full range of 
intervention scenarios.  This includes being required to: 
• prevent or mediate violent conflicts; 
• help stabilise states emerging from violent conflicts; and 
• support subsequent recovery and reconstruction.
3.2. Policy is a statement of intent, or a commitment to act.  Policy describes what 
we need to achieve (the ends).  Strategy describes how we will do this (the ways) and 
what resources we will need (the means).  
Ends, ways and means
Chapter 3 – Ends, ways 
and means

 JDP 05 58
3
3.3. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine,68 outlines 
the UK’s strategic structures and mechanisms for Defence decision-making.   JDP 01 
also introduces planning and decision-making as the elements that contribute to 
operations design.
3.4. Political end-state.  The political end-state is quantified by national and coalition 
goals.  The ends articulate the political intentions of the UK Government for any 
specific campaign, expressed as outcomes and strategic objectives.  Stability-related 
ends could include outcomes that seek to: stop extensive human suffering; end state 
repression; or reduce mass-effect weapons proliferation.  However, providing precise 
outcomes in times of crisis is likely to pose a challenge for key decision-makers for a 
variety of reasons.
a. Incomplete information and intelligence.  Decision-makers are unlikely 
to have all the information necessary to make fully-informed decisions.  The 
significant amount of information that is available also adds to the pressure as 
decision-makers must quickly determine what is, and is not, relevant.
b. Time pressure.  Key stakeholders will require quick decisions to inform 
subsequent planning.  This may mean decisions have to be made without the 
benefit of detailed analysis and consultation.  
c. Short-term vision.  Attention may sometimes be focused predominantly on 
short-term objectives that meet the immediate needs in response to a crisis, 
rather than focusing on the long-term requirements.  Some short-term activities 
may have long-term unintended consequences if not considered as part of a 
prolonged solution.
68  JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine. 
Section 1 – Ends
Disbanding the Iraqi Army
In Iraq, the short-term decision to disband the Iraqi Army after the US-led invasion in 2003 
meant that large numbers of previously enfranchised Sunnis at senior and junior levels now 
had no role in the new Iraqi state.  This actively contributed to the deteriorating security 
situation, hampered political progress and was a factor leading to the subsequent insurgency, 
to which these former military personnel provided weapons, manpower and expertise.
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 59
3
3.5. National security objectives.  The National Security Council (NSC) sets our 
Government’s national security objectives in accordance with the National Security 
Strategy (NSS) and directs how they should be delivered.  It provides top-level 
integration across the departments of state and other stakeholders that contribute to 
national security.  More detail can be found in JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine.  
3.6. Initial response.  The NSC is the appropriate forum to address crisis response.  
However, the complexity of any crisis may hinder early decisions.  New information 
and political direction will become apparent as a crisis evolves meaning that initial 
intentions and objectives may develop, or change completely, as we establish:
• a better understanding of the outcomes we wish to achieve;
• the extent of our legal authority to act;
• the means available to achieve the desired outcomes; and 
• whether the UK intends to act unilaterally or, more likely, as part of an 
international response.69
3.7. National goals.  Whether operating in a coalition or UK-only campaign, there 
should be a single overarching governmental integrated campaign plan which 
defines the UK’s strategic objectives.  These will be guided by the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office’s (FCO) foreign policy, informed by strategic all-source 
assessment, and set at the highest level within the NSC.  These objectives must 
include the campaign requirements for the MOD, as well as other government 
departments.  The host nation’s goals must also be considered to inform the UK’s 
plan.
69  This could be bilateral or multinational.
‘In multinational operations, nations have to balance the collective objectives of the 
alliance or coalition with their own respective national goals.’
JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 60
3
3.8. Coalition goals.  When acting in a coalition, our Government’s campaign 
plan should be consistent with the strategy and plan of the coalition.  There will be 
occasions when the UK will have specific requirements that are not incorporated 
within those of the coalition.  This is particularly likely in coalition stabilisation 
campaigns where complete unity of effort between participating nations may be 
unachievable.  Agreeing common ends with a coalition of states is likely to be both 
difficult and time consuming and will inevitably require extensive negotiation and 
compromise.  This will be particularly true during the early stages of a crisis due to 
the uncertainty of the situation.  As a situation evolves, the UK’s original intent may 
be adapted to broaden support amongst the international community.  Military 
commanders should acknowledge the dynamic nature of setting political ends and 
expect their own planning to take place under uncertain conditions.  This will require 
a flexible approach within a dynamic and evolving process. 
3.9. Strategies.  For countries in which the UK has an interest because of conflict, 
stability and security issues, there should be an extant government NSC-endorsed 
strategy.  This will lay out our Government’s overarching objectives in those countries 
and will include input from all departments represented at the NSC.  While strategies 
do evolve, particularly in response to emerging crises, it is important that the military 
campaign is consistent with, and supports, the wider governmental objectives.
3.10. The ways seek to map a path from the current position to the desired political 
outcome.  This will identify the specific strategic objectives that need to be met to 
facilitate the requisite change.  The ways available to our Government to address 
instability will be varied and must take into account the resources available, and 
reflect the nature of the crisis or situation.  Each situation will be different and context 
specific.  There is no ‘templated’ solution that will fit every eventuality.
Section 2 – Ways
‘To deliver this strategy we will enhance our national security structures which will 
promote our further integrated, whole-of-government approach.’
‘We aim to be the leading soft power nation, using our resources to build the 
relationships that can project and enhance our influence in the world.’
National Security Strategy and Strategic 
Defence and Security Review 2015
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 61
3
3.1 1. Some specific types of military operations that could be applied alongside 
civilian activities to address instability include: 
• conflict prevention;
• peace support;
• stabilisation;
• counter-insurgency; and
• security force assistance.  
More detailed information on each of these can be found in the respective North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Allied joint publications which are listed in 
Chapter 1.
Integrated approach.
3.12. JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine explains how the military instrument often 
plays a decisive role in providing or building a secure environment.  However, 
crisis management cannot succeed without active cross-government and 
inter-agency cooperation.  Effective inter-agency relationships need more than simply 
harmonising processes.  Relationships work better where people value the different 
cultures involved and show patience and understanding when required.  Building 
relationships benefits from regular and routine interaction.
3.13. In a national context, an integrated 
approach requires clear national 
objectives, strong political leadership 
and collaboration across departments 
to ensure the UK’s national power is 
coherently applied.  A national approach 
will usually be framed within a broader 
multinational response, involving many 
actors including allies, international 
organisations and non-governmental 
organisations.  As nations and 
organisations may have competing aims 
and agendas, achieving coherence in a 
multinational context is likely to be more 
challenging than it is in a national context.
3.14. In complex multi-agency situations 
involving civilian organisations and a 
civilian head of mission, military activity 
A A AA ssususususususuuuuucccccccccccccccc eesesesesesesessfsfsfffsfssss ulululululuulu iiiinnntntn egegegrarraateteteeddddd aapapapappprprprproaoaoaoaoaaaoaoaao chchchchchchchh rrrreqqqqqeqeqeqqeqeqequiuiuiuiuiirrerererer ssssss aacacaaca titittitit vevveeeevevvveee 
crcrc ososossososoo ss--ssss-gogogogoveveevernrnnnnmememmm ntntntnntntntntntn cccooooopepepeperararararaaar titiitttioononononooono
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 62
3
may only address part of the desired outcome.  While it is unlikely that absolute 
consistency will be achieved between civilian and military activities, commanders 
are to both promote, and support, an integrated approach.  An integrated approach 
comprises four guiding principles.
a. Proactive engagement between all entities, ideally ahead of a crisis, 
enables a more cohesive response to complex situations.  To increase the time 
available for reaction, a shared approach to collecting and interpreting crisis 
indicators is necessary.
b. Shared understanding brings distinct professional, technical and 
cultural disciplines together, albeit with unique values and perceptions.  
Understanding helps to meld different capabilities, gives extra perspectives 
and may enhance resilience.  Between crises, a shared understanding can only 
be built through cooperative working practices, liaison and education.
c. Outcome-based thinking requires all participants to base their thinking 
on the outcomes required to deliver a favourable situation.  Cohesion and 
coherence, delivered by good leadership, will help all entities to work towards 
agreed outcome-based objectives that are consistent with the national 
strategic aims.
d. Collaborative working enhances the trust that underpins productive 
relationships.  Integrated information management, infrastructure and 
connectivity, which support common working practices, generate a more 
collaborative ethos.
From a UK perspective, the ‘integrated approach’ has replaced the term ‘comprehensive 
approach’ as we have achieved greater coherence in ways of working between government 
departments.  The term was first introduced into our lexicon in the 2010 National Security 
Strategy (NSS) and Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR).  However, NATO, the 
European Union (EU) and other international organisations still use the term comprehensive 
approach which denotes coordinated collaborative working across departments and 
organisations where the high level of integration achievable in a national operation may 
not be achievable during coalition operations for organisational and political reasons.  
This publication will use integrated approach but it is accepted that other terms such as 
‘whole of government’ and ‘whole of government plus’ are commonly used by our allies 
and partners.  An awareness and understanding of these different terms is vital for those 
working in this environment.
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 63
3
3.15. Enabling the integrated approach.  Applying the integrated approach requires 
a constant level of collaboration between departments and a firm understanding by 
staff of departmental purposes, priorities, cultures and ways of working; how these 
differ and how they can complement each other.  The principles of the integrated 
approach are enabled by the cross-government crisis management machinery, 
at the centre of which is the National Security Secretariat supporting the NSC.  
Departmental assets are pooled and coordinated to develop and deliver integrated 
planning and outputs through existing mechanisms.  Further details on this are 
contained in JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine.70 
Multinational approach
3.16. Although the UK may be required to act alone, in most cases our Armed Forces 
are likely to operate in partnership.  This may be as the lead or as a contributing 
nation in a NATO operation, with other established allies and partners, or as part of 
70 JDP 01,  UK Joint Operations Doctrine , Chapter 2, Section 3.
71 De Waal J, Depending on the Right People , Chatham House (U), 2013.
One commentator observed that in a recent example of stabilisation operations (Iraq), 
“Britain seems to have suffered a wider failure of the government system, with politicians, 
senior military officers and civil servants all playing their part.  Politicians and civil servants 
did little to ensure that military action supported political aims (conscious of the close 
military press relationship).  [This was compounded with] some senior officers [showing] 
little appreciation of the political impact of military action, while others felt their role was 
principally to support the institutional interests of their branch of the armed forces.  These 
problems were the result of a situation in which there was no well understood model 
for how ministers, senior military officers and civil servants should work together.  [The 
government] must ensure that its use of military force properly supports its political aims 
and is better integrated with the other levers of national power.  The government should 
make its decision-making process on the use of force subject to a formal code, approved 
by parliament.  This code should define the process through which decisions are taken, 
and the roles and responsibilities of those involved.”71  This experience provides a salutary 
lesson in the importance of adopting a truly integrated approach.
In comparison to the Iraq experience, previous ‘successful’ operations, such as the 
Malayan Emergency and, more recently, the intervention supporting the United Nations 
(UN) Mission in Sierra Leone, appear to demonstrate true unity of civil and military 
purpose and effort.  Closer inspection of bo th examples, however, provides more nuanced 
insights regarding the importance and context of the civil-military coordination of effort, 
and the risks attached to a lack of collaboration.
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 64
3
an ad hoc coalition.  The aim of most multinational responses will be set out as a UN 
Security Council Resolution or as part of a ceasefire or treaty settlement.  Before any 
national commitment to participate can be made, diplomatic engagement is required 
to formulate both the multinational aim and the character of the multinational 
response.
3.17. Just as individual Services bring di fferent attributes and limitations to joint 
operations, allies and coalition partners will do the same on multinational operations.  
Understanding other nations’ military capabilities and the ability to merge these into 
a cohesive force, underpins the conduct of multinational military operations.  Our 
ability to operate with other nations requires flexibility and interoperability.  However, 
working together, in either an integrated or multinational capacity, may confer or 
generate extra responsibilities for communication and de-confliction.  Multinational 
operations may also generate extra force protection and sustainment requirements.
3.18. When working together, good ‘followership’ is as vital as strong leadership.  
Military commanders must recognise and promote the benefits of cooperation to 
achieve unity of effort, while not necessarily enjoying unity of command.  Where 
a common approach may not be possible owing to national and organisational 
sensitivities, commanders should seek as inclusive an approach as possible.  Effective 
collaboration requires flexibility, openness and sensitivity towards all stakeholders.
Regional approach
3.19. Building stability must include a re gional dimension.  Instability may be 
exported from neighbouring fragile states and, consequently, threaten regional 
security.  Neighbouring states will usually have some political, security, economic 
and social influence on the affected state and this can be either positive or negative.  
Securing their active support for any political settlement will be advantageous and 
should ideally take place as a preventative measure, thereby avoiding the need for 
intervention.  A regional approach could include:
• protecting international borders; 72
• denying safe havens for irregular groups; 
• supporting humanitarian assistance; and 
• garnering support for wider, regional security initiatives.  
72 Including protection from corruption, such as bribes at border crossings.
Building stability 
must include 
a regional 
dimension. 
”
“
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 65
3
3.20. In certain circumstances, a regional security consensus will be required that 
is capable of integrating the host nation within a regional context.  An international 
force may need to align its area of influence with its area of interest – greatly 
increasing the area of operations.  Regional engagement can then be used to 
restrict the flow of money, personnel and materiel to support local irregular actors.  
Conversely, failure to engage with the wider region will almost certainly increase 
regional instability and may result in an unachievable campaign plan.
Instruments of power
3.21. JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine,73 explains that national strategy directs the 
coordinated application of the three instruments of national power: diplomatic; 
economic; and military.  These three instruments of power are underpinned by 
information and understanding.
3.22. The diplomatic instrument.  For the UK, diplomacy is key in understanding 
different conflicts and bringing parties together.  The diplomatic process is a 
continuous one that can be applied before (prevention), during (mediation) and after 
(peace-building) a conflict.  We conduct diplomacy at a variety of levels, ranging from 
junior to the most senior diplomats and the level of engagement used can often 
send an important message.  Diplomacy can be used as either a ‘carrot’ or ‘stick’.  
For example, by engaging with belligerents in the diplomatic process or isolating 
them from a position of influence.  This instrument is an essential component of the 
ways and means required to exert influence and pressure as part of the integrated 
approach.  Although diplomacy can be used unilaterally, the effect can be greatly 
enhanced by working as part of a 
multinational effort (for example, 
with the UN, NATO, EU and so on).  
Diplomacy can help determine the 
level of response including imposing 
sanctions through to authorising the 
use of force.
73  JDP 0-01 , UK Defence Doctrine , Chapter 1, Section 4, page 12.
DiDiiiiplplpppp omommmacacaaa y y isis cccccononduductc eded aatt aaa vavaririr eteteteetty y yy ofofoof llevevvvelelee sss
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 66
3
3.23. Diplomacy is about managing international relations.  Successful diplomacy 
depends on the power of persuasive negotiation, reinforced by capable and credible 
hard power (both military and economic sanctions).  Diplomacy is enhanced by a 
combination of reputation and integrity, the skilful interplay of the other instruments 
of power and effective communication.  While diplomacy has traditionally been 
regarded a state-to-state activity, it has evolved to incorporate other opinion-formers, 
power-brokers and third parties.  
3.24. The economic instrument.  Overseas investment, international flows of 
capital and trade, and development assistance provide scope for exerting economic 
influence.  The UK uses a range of economic incentives, boycotts, tariffs and sanctions 
to influence decisions and shape behaviour.  The potential influence of economic 
measures can be affected by the degree of economic integration and the political 
character of recipient countries.  This is also complicated by the interplay between 
public and private influences, the operation of market forces and the complex 
relationships between global and national rates of growth and economic activity.  
In some circumstances, military activity will support the economic instrument (for 
example, through embargo operations).  Placing military equipment contracts 
or reforming indigenous military structures in a foreign country may foster other 
positive economic outcomes, but care must be taken to mitigate the potential  
longer-term risk of corruption.
3.25. The military instrument.  Military power is the ultimate instrument and 
expression of national power.  Activities can range from deterrence and coercion 
through to deliberately applying force to neutralise a specific threat.  Although 
most effective when employed alongside the other instruments to achieve national 
objectives, the military instrument can be a decisive factor.  In difficult negotiations 
with intractable opponents, diplomacy may only be successful if backed up by the 
credible prospect of force.  Therefore, the military instrument has both a cognitive 
and physical effect.  The military instrument’s unique contribution is to threaten, or 
apply, legitimate force to ensure our nation’s security and defend national interests.  
Defence Engagement aims to dispel hostility, build and maintain trust, and assist in 
developing responsible, competent and democratically accountable forces.  It may 
also facilitate other UK military activities, for example, by setting the conditions for 
overseas-basing, access or over-flight, and cooperation with allies and partners.  
Defence Engagement is conducted by a variety of actors.  Some of these are part of 
the permanent Engaged Force, such as the overseas network of Defence Attachés, 
whereas others will join the Engaged Force for shorter periods of time.  For example, a 
short-term training team could be generated from the Adaptive Force for a six month 
deployment, or a warship deployed as part of the Committed Force could conduct 
a visit to a priority country for a few days.  More detail on the use of the military 
instrument in stabilisation operations is in Chapter 4.
The military 
instrument’s 
unique 
contribution is 
to threaten, or 
apply, legitimate 
force to ensure 
our nation’s 
security and 
defend national 
interests. 
”
“
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 67
3
Policy choices for a military response
3.26. Historically, the UK military has referred to a ‘spectrum of conflict’, ranging 
from stable peace through a variety of other activities (including peace support 
operations and counter-insurgency) to general war.  This binary, linear and sequential 
view overlooked the inevitable concurrency and unique challenges posed by 
conflicts that have different characteristics.  In the modern world, previously 
discrete operational themes now routinely overlap and merge.  In one model this 
is represented by a fractured spectrum of concurrent missions in which all types of 
conflict are shown to exist simultaneously, each coming to the surface at certain 
times.  Even this is
inadequate to fully describe the contemporary character of conflict.  Today’s reality 
sees an increased blurring of the distinctions between adversaries and the way they 
use force to achieve political goals.  
3.27. This complexity requires an alternative, non-linear model which is the conflict 
mosaic as illustrated in Figure 3.1.  This mosaic fuses operational themes into a 
combination of sequential and concurrent activities.  
Figure 3.1 – Fusion of military activity – the conflict mosaic
74 Hoffman, F G. Hybrid Warfare and Challenges .  National Defense University Washington DC Institute 
for National Strategic Studies, 2009.  Note that hybrid or ambiguous warfare is commonplace as seen in 
Ukraine, Syria/Iraq and Yemen.
‘Future conflict will blend the lethality traditionally associated with state conflict and the 
fanatical and protracted fervour of irregular warfare.’
Hybrid Warfare and Challenges
F G Hoffman74
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 68
3
3.28. Building stability does not stand alone as a discrete type of operation; it is 
organic to almost all military operations.  The concept is similar to (but much wider 
than) Krulak’s description of the Three Block War75 in which combat, peacekeeping 
and humanitarian assistance all take place simultaneously, in close proximity and 
require the Engaged Force to show agility by transitioning between these activities 
at high tempo.  This is reinforced in the concept of building stability overseas, which 
provides an overarching context for subordinate thematic operations, such as security 
force assistance, peace support and counter-insurgency.
3.29. Policy choices – the range of national response.  The UK’s contribution to 
building stability will be determined by national interests, obligations (including 
commitments to international development goals) and national security imperatives.  
These policy choices will primarily be made outside the MOD.  Defence’s principal 
contribution will be to articulate the range of alternative contributions that the 
military could potentially make.  The integrated approach to strategic planning 
for fragile states provides this mechanism and the options will be dependent on 
the time-frame.  Early on, routine regional engagement or international Defence 
Engagement, in the form of security force assistance or other military capacity 
building, may help a state to avoid instability.  Alternatively, it may be appropriate to 
deploy a force to deter sponsors of instability, or contain the export of threats from 
one country to another.  In the worst case, where instability and insecurity has taken 
hold, it may be appropriate to deploy a joint force to intervene.  The preferred option 
will almost always be small-scale early engagement to prevent a fragile environment 
from deteriorating and escalating into full blown instability and conflict.  Effective 
early intervention will almost invariably save lives and money.
3.30. The role of the military.  In support of national security objectives, and 
invariably within a wider cross-government approach, our Armed Forces provide 
critical capabilities that can support stability, tackle threats at source and respond to 
crises overseas before they impact on our national security.  
a. Regional and international security cooperation.  In many circumstances, 
instability within a state or region can be reduced by host governments 
and regional organisations with limited external support from the wider 
international community.  In such a scenario, the UK may choose to contribute 
to a limited-objective international security cooperation initiative, such as arms 
75  Krulak, C C., The Strategic Corporal: Leadership in the Three Block War .  Center for Army Lessons Learned 
Fort Leavenworth Ks Virtual Research Library, 1999.
Section 3 – Means
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 69
3
control, counter-narcotics operations, military capacity building or security 
sector reform.  An example is Operation BASILICA in 2000, which involved 
retraining and re-equipping Sierra Leone’s Armed Forces.
b. Counter weapons of mass effect proliferation.  In some cases, instability 
may be the catalyst for weapons of mass effect76 technology to fall into the 
hands of either belligerent states or armed non-state groups, such as Al-Qaeda.  
In this scenario, it is likely that UK national security interests and imperatives 
will be engaged within a counter-proliferation operation.  
c. Deterrence or containment.  Instability within a state may provide a haven 
for non-state actors intent on attacking the UK, its allies or its interests.  Where 
this threat may be effectively deterred or contained, the UK may choose to 
participate in international operations designed to reduce the impact of the 
activities of these groups.  For example, air and maritime operations in the 
Arabian Gulf and Horn of Africa region have been used to disrupt the flow of 
foreign fighters between unstable states.
d. Building stability in support of wider state-building.  In some 
circumstances, state instability engages the UK’s interests or obligations to 
such a degree that deterrence alone will be ineffective.  Here, the ability to 
conduct a spectrum of intervention operations up to, and including, high-
intensity war-fighting (usually as part of a coalition) may be required.  The 
International Security Assistance Force operation, conducted by NATO as 
part of wider stability and state-building initiatives within Afghanistan, is an 
example.
3.31. Graduated response.  This variety of roles and capabilities offers the UK 
Government choices for how to use the military instrument of power in support 
76  Weapons of mass effect is referred to within NATO as weapons of mass destruction.
Amid the instability of the Middle East in the early 21st Century, one of many serious 
incidents was the use of sarin by the Assad regime in Damascus in August 2013.  This 
caused some 1400 deaths, mainly civilians.  But, largely as a result of this action, the 
international community has been able to achieve one undoubted success: the destruction 
of Syria’s declared chemical weapons programme.  In less than 12 months, of the 1300 
tonnes of chemical weapons that Syria admitted to possessing, more than 97% was 
destroyed, as well as the associated munitions and production equipment.  This has 
reduced the risks that these weapons will be used again to cause large-scale casualties in 
the region and has further strengthened the international ban on chemical weapons.
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 70
3
of national security objectives.  The scale of military commitment can range from 
providing a solitary adviser, a single unit, an aircraft or a ship to conduct international 
security cooperation, to deploying a sizeable joint force (see Figure 3.2).  A regional 
military presence can be used in support of all levels of commitment within the 
affected country and, in some circumstances, can be applied as the only military 
activity in support of diplomatic efforts to prevent violent conflict.  Clearly, an early 
commitment to help prevent a downward spiral in a fragile state will be considerably 
less onerous for intervening forces than the scale necessary to facilitate restoration.  
The least intrusive form of response, consistent with achieving national objectives and 
policy imperatives, should be the goal.  Intervention operations requiring significant 
resources and persistence will invariably be the last resort.  In some instances (for 
example, Sierra Leone in 2000) all of these elements may be present simultaneously.
Figure 3.2 – The graduated range of military commitment
3.32. Defence’s role within an integrated approach.  An integrated approach is 
broader than a cross-government approach as it will often be both multi-agency 
and multinational.  Mutually-supporting cross-departmental and multi-agency effort 
should enable comprehensive tactical activity to create campaign effect.  Defence will 
enable the security conditions and, within the overall civilian-led framework, may lead 
on specific aspects of security sector reform  (including security sector stabilisation) 
such as military capacity-building.  The majority of other activities will be civilian led 
including: 
• governance (including counter-corruption, accountability and 
transparency);
• political processes, including reconciliation; 
• police and justice sector reform; 
• restoring basic services and infrastructure; 
• economic and financial development; and 
• longer-term social and infrastructure development.  
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 71
3
Some of these may require a supporting contribution from the military, such as 
restoring essential services in a non-permissive (conflict) environment.
3.33. Shared endeavour.  Our opponents understand the importance and the 
fragility of any comprehensive or integrated approach and, therefore, are likely to 
use tactics that deliberately target and drive away vulnerable civil actors.  The notion 
of impartiality or neutrality has limited relevance in this context.  Civilian participants 
will automatically become part of the conflict.  By exploiting this potential 
fracture-point, adversaries can undermine the collective will and perseverance of the 
coalition.  Reducing the creation of integrated effect will allow opponents freedom 
of manoeuvre while concurrently spoiling the authority and credibility of the host 
nation and supplanting it with their own.  This should be countered by reinforcing the 
notion of a shared endeavour between the military, other government departments, 
non-governmental organisations and multi-agency partners. 
Key contributors – The Stabilisation Unit
3.34. The Stabilisation Unit is an operat ional agency whose purpose is to help 
Her Majesty’s Government (HMG) respond to crises and address the causes of 
instability overseas.  It is a uniquely integrated civil-military operational unit, with 
core staff members from ten government departments, plus serving military and 
police officers.  It is the government’s centre of expertise and best practice for 
stabilisation, conflict, security and justice, and is designed to be agile, responsive 
and well-equipped to operate effectively in high-threat and high-risk environments.   
It supports NSC departments but does not take ownership of individual crises or 
policies.  Humanitarian and consular crises remain the preserve of the Department for 
International Development (DFID) and the FCO respectively.  The Stabilisation Unit is 
funded by the government’s Conflict, Stability and Security Fund, and is answerable 
to the NSC (Officials).
3.35. The National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 
recognises the Unit’s role in supporting more effective cross-government crisis 
‘The nature of the operating environment requires Land Forces to contribute to a 
whole-of-government approach (increasingly coordinated with the private sector).  
There is also an emphasis on the need for persistent engagement overseas with 
complementary activity in the UK.’
Commander Land Forces’ Directive, 
May 2014
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 72
3
response, stabilisation and conflict prevention in fragile states.  In this capacity, the 
Stabilisation Unit may engage in:
• a rapidly evolving crisis (for example, Libya and Syria), where the NSC and 
Cabinet Office is driving coordination and the pace of activity is frenetic;
• an ongoing crisis (such as Afghanistan or Somalia), where our Government’s 
activity, though high profile, is at a more normal pace or until central 
coordination mechanisms are established; or
• upstream prevention, in respect of ‘watch-list’ type countries, where there is 
cross-departmental interest and the potential for focused support.
3.36. The Stabilisation Unit supports an integrated cross-government approach to 
stabilisation, conflict and instability in a number of different ways.
a. Analysis.  Supporting our Government’s analysis at a regional, national or 
sub-national level (including joint analysis of conflict and stability).
Cooreeeeeeeeeeeee ssssssssssssssssssstattaatatatatatataattataataat fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff sssssssssupupupupuuppopopopopoppppppp rtrrtr ssstatataaabibbibibililililisasasasasaaaatititititiiiitt ononononononoononnononnnno ooooooooooooooopepepepepepepppeppepepppp rarrarararar tititititititttt ononononnnnnnnss anananddddd dddd prpprrrogogograrammmmmmesesess iinn aa nunuumbmbmbm ereer ooooffffff dididididdifffffffererenenenennt tt tt wawwwaawawawwwwawawaw ysysysysyy
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 73
3
b. Crisis planning and developing strategy.  Participating in crisis planning 
processes and developing response strategies.
c. Programme development, review and evaluation.  Supporting programme 
development, scoping, review and evaluation.  Where strategically important 
and practically feasible, conducting detailed programme and project design.
(1) Technical assistance.  Providing direct support to government 
officials or key multilateral partners.  This includes being the UK’s hub for 
international policing support to fragile and conflict-affected states. 
(2) Deployments.  Finding the right people, with the right experience, 
and deploying them safely, with the right equipment, to the right place at 
the right time. 
d. Lesson learning and knowledge.  Capturing, analysing and sharing 
across government evidence  of what works, to inform future conflict and 
stabilisation planning and response.
e. Training.  Delivering cross-government training on: conflict, stability and 
security; security and justice; and women, peace and security.  Participating in 
departmental/military training courses and exercises.
f. Surge capacity.  Providing surge capacity and backfilling support to 
departments working in, or on, fragile and conflict affected states.
3.37.  The Stabilisation Unit also controls  the Civilian Stabilisation Group – a pool 
of over 1,000 civilian experts drawn from the public and private sectors.  The Civilian 
Stabilisation Group has experts in stabilisation, governance, rule of law, livelihoods, 
communications, infrastructure, public finance, security sector reform and a myriad 
of other critical areas who work with local partners to assist a country’s recovery.  The 
Group is made up of some 800 independent consultants (deployable civilian experts), 
as well as over 200 civil servants, from over 30 departments, across all grades.  The 
Stabilisation Unit can also call on a pool of serving police officers when required.
3.38.  At any one time the Stabilisation Unit is typically supporting around 180 
deployed personnel in the field, in around 20 countries in Asia, the Middle East, 
Sub-Saharan Africa and wider Europe. 
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 74
3
Key contributors – 77 Brigade 
3.39. Formerly known as the Security Assistance Group (SAG), 77 Brigade is a 1* 
formation created to enhance and integrate information activities and outreach 
capabilities in Defence.  By merging the Military Stabilisation Support Group, Security 
Capacity Building Team, 15 Psychological Operations Group and the Army’s Media 
Operations Group into a single entity, it achieves synergy across these capability 
areas and provides the basis for transformative change in their employment and 
future development.  As a key Defence partner with the Stabilisation Unit, 77 Brigade 
contributes to analysis and planning at all levels and cross-Whitehall.  The Brigade 
contributes to contingent capability by supporting formation headquarters.  This is 
primarily in the land environment but also applies to Joint Forces Command and the 
other Services where required.
3.40. The 77 Brigade partnership with the Stabilisation Unit places it on the interface 
with broader cross-government efforts to address the causes and consequences of 
instability.  Through early engagement in planning and analysis, it helps to shape 
the conditions for an effective integrated and inter-agency approach, and ensures 
effective use of scarce resources.  Underpinned by robust audience, actor and 
adversary analysis, the 77 Brigade contribution seeks to reinforce the centrality of 
influence with an imperative to focus activity and effects on achieving genuine and 
lasting behavioural change. 
ThThThThhheeeeeeeeeeee mmimimimimimiimiiimimmiimmim lilililililililiiiiiiilliiilittatatataaaatttttttatttttatttataryryy ccanan ssupuppoooooopoortrtrtrtttrtrtrt hhhhhummananananititittititittitttitiitttarararaararaararariiiaaiaaii nn asasasassasasaassssisisisssissiiiisisstststssts aaaaannananananannnancececececececececeeeece aaaaandnddndd ddddddisisisasasassttetetetetteteeteteerrr rr r rr rerererererrererer lilililililililililliefefefefefefefefefeef oooppepepepepepepepepeppepppppppppppppp rararaarararrararaaatitititittttttttttttitit ononnnnnnnonno ssssss
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 75
3
3.41. 77 Brigade is an enabler of, and contributor to, persistent overseas 
engagement and capacity-building efforts to prevent or resolve crisis without the 
requirement for military intervention.  This includes providing a range of civil-military 
cooperation and thematic experts able to integrate military support and, where 
required, augment civilian capacity.  The Brigade provides security expertise and a 
focus for the military contribution to cross-government security capacity-building 
and support to military-led capacity building, including training.  A light footprint 
means that individuals and specialist equipment can be deployed rapidly over long 
distances to achieve pre-emptive or early effect.  77 Brigade contributes to overseas 
engagement and capacity building in a variety of ways.
a. Providing thematic experts to support the Permanent Joint Headquarters’ 
operational liaison and reconnaissance teams (OLRT)77 and missions led by the 
Stabilisation Unit or another government department. 
b. Providing civil-military cooperation experts to integrate military support to 
other government departments or non-government organisation-led missions, 
including for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations. 
c. Supports UK humanitarian assistance and disaster relief through liaison 
and planning and providing rapid needs assessments.
d. Specialist support to military-led overseas engagement and capacity 
building. 
e. Specialist support to other force elements preparing for capacity-building 
tasks.
3.42. 77 Brigade contributes to contingent capability across the spectrum of 
operations by augmenting core formation headquarters staff and providing specialist 
information activities and outreach capability where required.  Wherever possible, 
habitual relationships developed during training will be maintained at readiness 
and on deployment.  The persistent 77 Brigade presence helps integrate other 
government departments and other agencies from the outset of contingent activity 
and provides continuity from planning, through execution and into an enduring 
operation.  77 Brigade helps to deliver an integrated approach set in the context of a 
shared strategic narrative.  Supported commanders will be better able to: manage the 
civil-military interface; ensure that representatives and staff from other government 
departments, non-governmental organisations and other civilian agencies are 
properly integrated; and integrate and synchronise military with civilian-led activity.
77 Manpower for an OLRT may come from either the Joint Force Headquarters or Joint Forces Logistic 
Component or the High Readiness Headquarters.
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 76
3
3.43. Civil-military cooperation is an enduring staff function.  It is defined as: the 
coordination and cooperation, in support of the mission, between the commander 
and civil actors, including the national population and local authorities, as well as 
international, national and non-governmental organizations and agencies.78  
3.44. Military assistance to civil effect provides a mechanism to harness military 
capability to build confidence and support for an enduring peace, focussing on the 
survival functions of a state – public order and the rule of law, basic public services 
and economic stability.  Military assistance to civil effect can plug gaps and build 
institutional capability when indigenous agencies, other government departments or 
non-governmental organisations are unable to do so.  Military assistance to civil effect 
is heavily reliant on Reserve personnel with thematic competences not routinely 
found in the military (for example, agriculturalists, power engineers, economists and 
public administrators).
Resourcing stabilisation – The Conflict, Stability and Security Fund
3.45. In April 2015, the Conflict, Stability and Security Fund replaced the Conflict 
Pool and provided  £1.033 billion of new and existing cross-government conflict 
prevention and security resources.  The Fund is shaped by a reformed strategy and 
prioritisation process which produces a more streamlined, less layered, structure with 
a clearer line of sight from NSC decisions and to programme priorities, and greater 
alignment between UK security interests and conflict prevention goals.
3.46. Like the Conflict Pool, the Conflict, Stability and Security Fund will contain 
a blend of official development assistance79 funding and non-official development 
assistance resources.  These programmes can fund a range of activities, from security 
sector reform and training80 to projects implemented by grassroots non-government 
organisations and civil society organisations as long as they are aligned with an NSC 
strategy. 
78  Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-06, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions.
79  Official development assistance funding must meet certain criteria set by the Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development; principally, that funding is focused on poverty reduction in 
specific, official development assistance-eligible countries.  The UK has committed to providing 0.7% of 
gross domestic product for official development assistance funding.
80 For example, building integrity to reduce the risk of corruption and promote transparency and 
accountability.
The Conflict, 
Stability and 
Security Fund 
provided 
 £1.033 billion 
of new and 
existing cross-
government 
conflict prevention 
and security 
resources.
”
“
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 77
3
3.47. National planning principles.  The need for our Government to be more 
integrated was introduced in the 2010 SDSR and re-inforced in the 2015 SDSR.  
There are a number of joint strategies across government, including the Building 
Stability Overseas Strategy, International Defence Engagement Strategy, 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (CONTEST), the Organised Crime Strategy and the Cyber 
Crime Strategy.  Joint planning is also essential as a shared analysis of the situation, 
efficient decision-making/coordination, and adequate resourcing, are key to a 
successful response.  These strategies are intended to enable effective prioritisation 
and synchronisation.  Ideally, the goal in any conflict-affected environment is to 
achieve an inclusive political settlement that creates the conditions for sustainable 
peace and a functioning state.  Recognising the limitations on UK resources and 
leverage in different countries, our Government is likely, in many cases, to operate 
in concert with like-minded countries or in the context of a wider multilateral effort.  
Applying the following planning mechanisms helps our Government to think through 
its priorities, level of ambition and how best to engage in a given country, as well as 
ensure value for money (economy, efficiency and effectiveness).
3.48. Joint analysis of conflict and stability.  A key tool for supporting the integrated 
approach is the joint analysis of conflict and stability (JACS).  This can help build a 
shared, cross-government understanding of the context and basic drivers of the 
conflict and instability in a particular country.  This enables our Government to 
develop a coherent, integrated strategy that draws together Defence, diplomacy and 
development tools.  This integrated analysis of conflict and instability, always focused 
at the strategic level, also provides an opportunity to raise the profile of key issues, 
both with interlocutors in country including the diplomatic, Defence and donor 
community, as well as international partners and within the UK Government.
81 Building Stability Overseas Strategy , paragraph 9.2.
Section 4 – The UK Government’s integrated 
planning mechanisms
‘We will introduce a new cross government strategic conflict assessment.  This will be used 
in conflict affected and fragile states to identify the situation specific interventions that will 
be most likely to succeed in helping to prevent conflict and build stability.’
Building Stability Overseas Strategy81
Ends, ways and means

 JDP 05 78
3
3.49. Military operational planning.  Operational-level planning is covered 
comprehensively in other publications.
a. JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine – Chapter 2 addresses planning 
and managing the military contribution to multinational, multi-agency and 
national operations.
b. Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operational-level 
Planning – this publication outlines the fundamental aspects of planning joint 
operations. 
CCrCrCrCrCrCrCrCrCrrisisisisisisissisisisisisisisissisis mmmmmmmanananannnagagagagggggagagaggggggggeement cannot succeed without actctivivee ccrrrrrroososss-s-s-gogog vevernrnmeementnt aaandnd iintntn ererr-a-aaaaagegencncy y coooopopoperere atatioioon
Ends, ways and means

JDP 05 79
3
Key points 
• The UK’s response to global instability and conflict is to consider and apply, 
where appropriate, all of the instruments of national power to shape the global 
environment and tackle potential risks at source.
• The UK, often alongside international partners, maintains the ability to respond 
swiftly and decisively across a full range of intervention scenarios.
• When crises emerge we will act to deliver rapid crisis prevention and response, 
improving our ability to take fast, appropriate and effective action to prevent a 
crisis or stop it escalating or spreading.
• The military instrument often plays a de cisive role in providing or building a 
secure environment.  However, crisis management cannot succeed without 
active cross-government and inter-agency cooperation.  
• An integrated approach requires clear national objectives, strong political 
leadership and collaboration across departments to ensure the UK’s national 
power is coherently applied. 
• National strategy directs the coordinate d application of the three instruments of 
national power: diplomatic; economic; and military.  These three instruments of 
power are underpinned by information and understanding.
• Diplomacy is key in understanding different conflicts and bringing parties 
together. 
• Successful diplomacy depends on th e power of persuasive negotiation, 
reinforced by capable and credible hard power.
• The military is the ultimate instrument and expression of national power.
• Building stability does not stand alone as a discrete type of operation; it is 
organic to almost all military operations. 
• The preferred option will almost alwa ys be small-scale early engagement to 
prevent a fragile environment from deteriorating and escalating into full blown 
instability and conflict.  Effective early intervention will almost invariably save 
lives and money.
• In support of national security obje ctives, and invariably within a wider 
cross-government approach, our Armed Forces provide critical capabilities that 
can support stability, tackle threats at source and respond to crises overseas 
before they impact on our national security. 
• The least intrusive form of response, consistent with achieving national 
objectives and policy imperatives, should be the goal. 
Ends, ways and means

[Page 90: No extractable text]

This chapter will look more closely at the military 
involvement in shaping a stable world.  We will initially 
consider influence and understanding before looking 
at generic military activity and conclude by considering 
specific military contributions across each part of the 
3Ps (protect, promote, prepare) framework.  As outlined 
previously, it is important to understand that any 
military involvement will be part of the wider integrated 
approach.
Chapter 4
81
JDP 05
4
Operational 
considerations and the 
military contribution
Section 1 – Understanding and influence.  .  .  .  .  .  .  83
Section 2 – Generic military involvement .  .  .  .  .  .  .  89
Section 3 – Specific military activity in the 
                       3Ps framework .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  98

 JDP 05 82
4
In the days of Waterloo, the army was all about war 
fighting.  Today we expect our army and our soldiers 
to be frontline ambassadors as well as fighting forces, 
wielding soft, smart as well as hard power…Better to 
reap the reward of early defence engagement than the 
whirlwind of later conflict.
Secretary of State for Defence
RUSI Land Warfare Conference
1 July 2015
“
”
Once you’ve identified the outcome that you’re seeking 
to achieve, you then go through a process of analysing 
the audiences that are relevant to the attainment 
of that objective, whether they’re actors, allies or 
adversaries.  You then take a view on what effect 
you need to achieve on those various actors.  Then 
you look into your locker of methodologies, which will 
arrange all things from soft through to hard power, and 
you work out the best method of synchronizing and 
orchestrating those range of effects to impart effect onto 
audience, to achieve the outcome.
Chief of the General Staff
Chatham House
17 Februar y 2015
“
”
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
83
Understanding
4.1. Understanding provides the contex t for the decision-making process which 
informs the application of national power.  The purpose of understanding is to 
equip decision-makers at all levels with the insight and foresight required to make 
effective decisions as well as manage the associated risks and second and subsequent 
order effects.  Understanding is defined as: the perception and interpretation of a 
particular situation in order to provide the context.82  It is developed from all forms 
of information, some of which is regulated and analysed, like intelligence and 
Government papers, and some is unregulated, such as social media.  Understanding 
in the context of our national interest:
• informs choice on developing state policy and strategies; and
• supports the application of national power to achieve influence. 
4.2. Understanding is a critical component of stabilisation activities.  As a global 
actor, we interact with different cultures, ethnic groups and races.  It is crucial 
that we develop and maintain an understanding of those we wish to influence.  
Understanding may also help us to avert crises through applying soft power early on.  
Therefore, while Defence will develop understanding, it must not be in isolation and 
should interconnect with the other instruments of national power.  Attempts to solve 
major security issues by military means alone seldom succeed in the long term (even 
if initially enjoying apparent success).  Only by understanding a situation or crisis can 
the appropriate range of responses be planned and orchestrated.  Responses may 
involve a variety of participants, including: 
• other government departments; 
• international organisations; 
• non-governmental organisations; 
82  See Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 04, Understanding.
Section 1 – Understanding and influence
Chapter 4 – Operational 
considerations and the military 
contribution
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 84
4
• other governments;
•  academia and think-tanks;
• private and commercial actors; and 
• local and regional populations.
4.3. Understanding must be built on up-to-da te information, self-awareness, critical 
analysis, collaboration and creative thinking.  Furthermore, building understanding is a 
collaborative process which requires cross-departmental analysis.83 
Influence 
4.4. All activity, military and civilian, kinetic or non-kinetic can have influence.  
Based on an understanding of target audiences, influence activity should be focused 
towards creating effect.  Military action should be assessed by its contribution towards 
influencing the key conflict relationship and achieving the eventual end-state.84 85
4.5. The desired outcome of cross-government activities is to change, or maintain, 
the character or behaviour of agreed audiences through physical and behavioural 
means.  All multi-agency capabilities can contribute to this process.  To achieve the 
desired outcome, activities need to be coordinated and focused.  Operations in the 
information environment on approved target audiences, coordinated with the full 
spectrum of military capability, are likely to be the lasting and decisive element of 
a stabilisation campaign.  Human beings are neither benign nor passive; they will 
respond to influence activity in different ways.  The inherent risk is that we cannot 
control how actions, words and images are received and processed.  Effective analysis 
and developed understanding will mitigate or reduce this risk.
4.6. Misunderstanding can lead to mistrust and increased tension.  Deployed cultural 
advisers and locally employed civilians can provide invaluable advice and the skills to 
83  More detail on understanding can be found in JDP 04, Understanding.
84 For more on influence and information activities, see Allied Joint Publication-3.10, Allied Joint Doctrine 
for Information Operations .
85 The Observer, 31 October 2004.
‘You may not like what he is saying.  You may abhor everything he stands for.  But you 
are listening.  The truth is that Osama bin Laden is very good at what he does.  He is one 
of the great propagandists.  He has an awesome understanding of the holy triumvirate 
of political communication: the power of the image, the message and the deed.  And he 
understands how they work together.’
Jason Burke, The Observer85
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
85
decode and understand cultural nuance.  Messages delivered by foreign spokesmen 
typically lack credibility and, regardless of content, are not as well received as those 
from familiar, trusted sources.  International forces should seek to use established 
channels for messaging.  Where these are absent or insufficient, they will need to 
build relationships with key leaders and the population to establish viable channels.
4.7. Influence is achieved when we change  the behaviour of the target audience.  
It is not just about messages or media, but about how the combination of the word 
and the deed are portrayed, interpreted and understood by audiences when viewed 
through a lens of their own culture, history, religion and tradition.  Influencing is 
challenging, and requires an understanding of target audiences that is difficult to 
achieve.  It will be contested with adversaries who may have a significant cultural 
advantage.
4.8. Adversaries usually have a comparative advantage over intervening forces 
and agencies because they share religion, ethnicity, culture, history and geography 
with the population.  Even in Northern Ireland where UK forces shared a common 
language and ethnicity (allowing every member of a foot patrol to read the graffiti, 
talk and listen to the population) the culture of the Republican movement was still 
not well understood.  This is made much harder where we do not share a language 
and nearly all communication with the population has to be conducted through an 
interpreter.  
Narratives
4.9. As a key element of the strategic communications plan,86 the narrative seeks 
to explain the actions of the main protagonists.  The military will use a narrative to 
explain the purpose of their presence in theatre, and develop an appropriate and 
coherent narrative for each audience.  The narratives that resonate best are those 
which embrace the concepts and language of target audiences, known as the 
86  Further detail on strategic communications can be found in Chapter 3 of JDP 3-00, Campaign 
Execution.
‘I am determined that we inculcate the idea of a ‘people-centric approach’ into our thinking 
– it is the orchestration of soft and hard levers aggregated to achieve ‘smart’ effect on a 
range of audiences that is decisive when applied at the right point in time and place.’
Commander Land Forces’ Directive, 
May 2014
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 86
4
‘stickiness’ of the message.  All actions should be planned and executed to support 
this narrative – and not the other way around.
4.10. Narratives should be flexible so that they are not undermined by local 
messages designed to respond to current events.  They should also be consistent 
with both the cross-government information strategy, any strategic communication 
strategy and, where possible, narratives of the host nation government.  Strategic-
level narratives set out broad themes which are reinforced by tailored, flexible local 
messages, creating a hierarchy of related messages.  They should be: 
• clear, credible and explain the campaign; 
• acceptable to all intervening parties and the host government; 
• linked to the UK’s political objectives; 
• able to support local messaging; 
• able to be backed up by coherent physical activity and imagery; and 
• have a positive impact on a variety of target audiences.
In short, to make a compelling and persuasive case we need to align our words, 
images and actions to influence key decision-makers and their people for strategic 
effect.  They must also be realistic and coincide with peoples’ expectations – this 
involves everyone, not just communicators.  It will be better to under-promise and 
over-deliver, than over-promise and be seen to fail.
Military influence tools
4.11. The military will create the effects necessary to achieve influence, then 
derive the information activities required to realise those effects and subsequently 
orchestrate them during execution.87  Activities will be organised by type.   All 
capabilities and types of activity are considered and, where appropriate, employed 
to create both physical and psychological effects in the most efficient and effective 
manner, although such effects are not mutually exclusive.  Fires and manoeuvre, 
for example, clearly achieve psychological, as well as physical effects.  Additionally, 
(although not exclusively) the military has a range of non-lethal tools specifically 
tailored to manage perceptions of information once it has been received.  These 
include: 
• information operations; 
• media operations; and 
• civil-military cooperation.  
87  Op.Cit., JDP 3-00, Chapter 3 gives more detail on joint action.  Land forces need a doctrine that 
is compatible with joint action yet adjusted for the characteristics of tactical land operations.  This is 
integrated action.  (More information can be found in Doctrine Note 15/01, Integrated Action, Director 
Land Warfare).
Narratives 
should be 
flexible so that 
they are not 
undermined by 
local messages 
designed to 
respond to 
current events. 
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
87
During planning, these tools should be fused together to form part of a coherent 
approach.
4.12. Any action must be accompanied by co ntinuously assessing the transformative 
effects (planned and unplanned) of stab ilisation activity and programmes and 
approaches must be adapted to manage risks and unintended consequences.  
Figure 4.1 illustrates how joint action enables the military commander to influence 
the target audience both at the strategic and operational levels.
Deterrence and coercion 
4.13. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine covers deterrence 
and coercion in detail.88  Deterrence and coercion strategies aim to counter threats 
to the UK’s security by communicating the consequences.  The threat of a military 
88  JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine , page 62.
Joint action – The deliberate use and 
orchestration of military capabilities and 
activities to effect an actor’s will, 
understanding and capability, and the 
cohesion between them to achieve 
influence. 
(JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition, Change 1)
Figure 4.1 – The commander’s joint action tools: aligning actions, words and 
images in time and space
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 88
4
response can influence an adversary’s calculation of risk during confrontation 
and opponents must be convinced that the potential consequences (the military, 
economic and diplomatic reaction) of their actions will outweigh any possible 
benefits.  Deterrence and coercion strategies differ:
• deterrence aims to dissuade a course of action; and
• coercion aims to encourage a course of action.
4.14. Reassurance is a further facet of dete rrence.  Incentives (including financial 
incentives) may shape behaviour both before, and after, any threat of force.  Incentives 
work well in tandem with threats.  For this reason, deterrence and coercion strategies 
should consider all available national instruments combined – in other words, by 
adopting an integrated approach.  Deterrence and coercion strategies are only viable 
if the threat of sanction is both credible and deliverable.  Apparent weakness, or lack 
of resolve, will fail to deter threats. 
4.15. In strategic terms, deterrence and co ercion are ways by which the government 
might seek to secure its policy ends.  Deterrence is broader than the UK’s nuclear 
capability; the nuclear deterrent is only one of the ways the UK deters threats and 
aggression.  Deterrence and coercion is also achieved through conventional means 
and a wider, more flexible range of postures and responses with the associated levels 
of military and political risk.
4.16. Viable deterrence and coercion strategies depend on an opponent deciding 
that their interests are too valuable to risk.  Deterrence and coercion strategies will be 
contested and commanders must understand the weight of effort an opponent will 
apply to achieve their aims.  Opponents will assess: 
• how they value the interests of their state or group; 
• their perception of the balance of power; 
• the bargaining space; 
• the alternatives that they may consider to using force; and 
• their expected gains and losses.  
4.17. Therefore, a detailed understanding of the context, including the cultural 
aspects and the prevailing political, economic and strategic situation – as an 
opponent perceives it – is crucial.  Deterrence and coercion strategies will only 
succeed if an opponent understands that the threats (or incentives) are credible.  
Effective deterrence and coercion strategies comprise four principles:89 
• credibility;
89  Further details can be found in JDP 0-01, Chapter 3, Section 3.
Deterrence 
and coercion 
strategies are 
only viable if 
the threat of 
sanction is both 
credible and 
deliverable. 
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
89
• communication;
• comprehension; and
• capability.
4.18. This section looks in more detail at how the military engages with building 
stability, and how this interacts (in a predominantly supporting way) with the 
civilian community, including national, international and indigenous civilian actors.  
Acknowledging the existence of discrete military activity, such as counter-insurgency, 
peace support operations and security force assistance,90 this section explores the 
escalating role of the military in preventing instability.  The key function is to enable 
stability through providing a safe and secure environment for other (predominantly 
civilian) actors to operate within.  The military will often play a substantial role in 
building and/or enabling stability.  Within this context, the military will primarily 
engage with other security and insurgent forces, but may also be involved with 
economic, cultural and socio-political aspects.  
Generic military functions 
4.19. Providing a safe and secure environment.  The primary, and often immediate, 
role of the UK military will be to contribute to providing security.  This will include 
reducing or preventing violence, and protecting people and vital infrastructure.  This 
will depend on the permissiveness of the operating environment and capabilities of 
the indigenous security forces (if the intervening external forces are there to support 
the host nation government).  Military involvement may contribute to all the 3Ps 
(protect, promote, prepare), depending on the nature and stability of the state in 
question, however, the principal focus will usually be linked to the protect function.  
Wherever possible, the focus should be in assisting or supporting the host nation 
security forces to establish security rather than doing it for them.
90  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.16, Allied Joint Doctrine for Security Force Assistance .
91 Twenty Seven Articles, 1917.
Section 2 – Generic military involvement
‘Do not try to do too much with your own hands.  Better the Arabs do it tolerably than 
that you do it perfectly.  It is their war, and you are to help them, not to win it for them.’
TE Lawrence91
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 90
4
4.20. Extent of military involvement.  Stabilisation operations require multiple lines 
of activity, only some of which are suited to military leadership and implementation.  
A non-permissive environment may mean that the military are sometimes the only 
option for delivering certain activities; even those they would not normally conduct 
(for example, acting in the absence of civilian policing and governance).  The potential 
risks of military involvement must be carefully considered and the starting point 
should be a deep understanding of the nature of the evolving political settlement.  
An integrated civilian and military effort will usually provide the best solution with 
military forces focussing on security and civilian actors leading on governance 
and development activities.  Depending upon the situation, the military might be 
required to either:
• deliver in all environments;
• assist in delivering in a se mi-permissive environment; or
• help enable in a non-permissive environment.
4.21. Permissiveness.  The intensity of the contest for security will dictate 
permissiveness, which should improve over time.  Within a permissive environment, 
the military will normally focus on its core roles.  However, in non-permissive areas, 
the military contribution may have to be wider.  In addition to establishing a robust 
security framework, the military may (in non-permissive circumstances) be required 
to contribute to wider stabilisation activities.  Every effort should be made to obtain 
multi-agency support.  
4.22. Establishing human security.  Where a state lacks the capability or will to 
meet basic human security needs, individuals may transfer loyalty to any group 
that promises to do so, which may 
include adversarial groups.  These 
groups can exploit human insecurity 
by providing money, basic social 
services and sometimes even a crude 
form of justice.  Therefore, winning 
the contest for human security is 
fundamental to developing 
host-nation government authority 
and, ultimately, state security.  Human 
security may include protecting from 
deprivation and disease, as well as 
violence.  Conflicts can cause large 
population migrations which may, in 
turn, trigger a famine or epidemic.  On 
occasion, military forces may need 
HuHuHuHuHuHuuHuHuHuHuuummamammmamm nnnnnn seseseseseseseses cucucucucucucucurirrririririrrrrirriitytytytytytytyyytytyty mmmmmmmmmmmmmmayayayyayayayayaayyy iiiiiiiinnnnncncnccnncncnnncllululululuululululululuudedededededededededd ppppppprroroorror teteteectctctcttctc inininiii ggg frfrfrfromomomomomommmmm ddddddddepepepepeepeeee riririiriiiiivavavavavavavaaavaaattititititititititiononononnoonooonno  
aananananannanannnna dd dddd dididididid seseseseasasasasasasasaaasaaasee,e,e,ee,e,e,e, aaaaaaaasssss weweweeeeweweellllllllll aas s s s viviviviiviviololleenenenncecececeeeecee
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
91
to provide emergency shelter, medical or food aid within the limits of their existing 
capacity.  However, UK Armed Forces should only undertake humanitarian assistance 
in close consultation with the Department for International Development (DFID) and 
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), or with international organisations 
working through these departments.
4.23. Countering adversaries and using force.  Direct military action against 
adversaries may be a central component of a stabilisation campaign.  In this case, 
setting the conditions for a negotiated political settlement will entail breaking the 
ideological, financial or intimidatory links within, and between, different adversarial 
and belligerent groups (as well as between them and the broader population).  In 
some cases, operations may be required to seize the initiative from an insurgent.  
This will require using force, particularly where resistance comes from committed, 
irreconcilable and well-organised adversaries.  There may be a fierce contest for the 
initiative, freedom of movement, authority, security provision and the support of the 
population.  Failure to seize the initiative may fatally undermine a campaign.  Using 
offensive air, land, maritime and special operations in a targeted, measured and 
highly discriminate manner may be required.  Such operations may be intended to: 
• decapitate adversarial command structures by killing or capturing key 
leaders; 
• defeat adversarial armed groups wh ere they hold something that has 
particular operational or political significance; 
• disrupt or destroy adversarial offensive, support and propaganda 
capabilities; and 
• deny adversarial groups safe havens from where they may launch attacks or 
challenge legitimate governance.
4.24. Minimising damage.  Offensive operations must minimise civilian casualties 
and damage to infrastructure otherwise they risk undermining the broader 
influence effort and breaching international law.  An operation that kills five 
low-level adversaries is counterproductive if the associated collateral damage leads 
to recruiting many more.  The dilemma is that adversaries will often choose to fight 
among the people for just this reason.  Since a contest of force should play to our 
advantage, creating the opportunity to use force decisively and minimise collateral 
risk will be a key challenge.  There is always a risk that operations to secure an area will 
simply displace an adversary to a new safe haven beyond the commander’s control.  If 
this happens, they may regroup, gain strength and strike where the host government 
and international forces and agencies are less able to respond.  An alternative 
Direct military 
action against 
adversaries may 
be a central 
component of 
a stabilisation 
campaign.
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 92
4
approach may be to isolate adversarial groups, gain information and disrupt their 
activities.  In some circumstances it may be better not to strike at all but instead to 
gather intelligence for later decisive actions.  
4.25. Detention.  Wherever possible, any arrest, detention, trial and imprisonment of 
an individual should be carried out by the host nation.  In exceptional circumstances 
where the host nation government lacks an effective police force, an independent 
judiciary or an effective penal system, it may be necessary for the military to conduct 
limited detention operations.  Where the military are required to conduct limited 
detention operations, this must be done by appropriately trained and qualified 
individuals.  The authority to conduct detention operations may be established 
by agreement with the host nation or a mandate provided by the United Nations 
Security Council and such operations should be short lived.  Where permitted, 
tactical questioning and interrogation may provide a valuable source of actionable 
intelligence.  This, in turn, enables more precise targeting and promotes the 
perception of progress, restraint and legitimacy.92  
Engaging with the security and justice sectors
4.26. Security sector capacity building.  Security is a key enabler, without which 
other vital development cannot take place.  Security capacity-building includes 
military, border, police and other internal security forces as well as their supporting 
institutions, together with non-state actors and civil society.  Pre-conceived ideas 
about what affects security should be avoided; for example, in some countries 
agriculture and fisheries will be significant.  These local forces must ultimately 
assume responsibility for security of the host nation and this may mean containing, 
and subsequently neutralising, irregular groups that threaten effective national 
governance.  Therefore, building these units may demand emphasis that matches, or 
even exceeds, that devoted to directly defeating an adversary.  Indigenous security 
capability will only be effective if underpinned by strong security institutions, such 
as a capable ministry of defence, together with responsive planning, personnel and 
procurement processes.  There must be a balance between leading and supporting 
security sector and capacity building operations.
4.27. Security sector reform.93  If a country’s capacity for facilitating and protecting 
its own economic activities is compromised, either through conflict or natural 
disaster, the military may be used to help re-establish these.  Security sector reform 
may help restructure a state’s military force, instil democratic principles and disband 
paramilitary organisations.  Capacity building and training support will help to make 
the host nation’s forces more effective and efficient.  Any military contribution to 
92  Further detail on captured persons activities can be found in JDP 1-10, Captured Persons.
93  Security sector reform is sometimes referred to as security systems reform.
Security is a 
key enabler, 
without which 
other vital 
development 
cannot take 
place.
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
93
security sector reform will always be part of a bigger, civilian-led integrated approach.  
Security sector reform programmes are intended to establish a secure environment 
based on development, the rule of law, good governance and local ownership of 
security.  Security sector reform is holistic in its approach to the security sector and 
includes all relevant actors in the process of either transforming an existing, but 
dysfunctional, security sector or establi shing a new one.  These programmes will 
include the host nation’s security services and should be tailored to address the 
specific environment.
4.28. Security sector reform planning.  Strategic planning is important in supporting 
security sector reform activities to delineate responsibilities between civilian and 
military actors and to ensure that resources (financial, personnel and expertise) are 
managed effectively.  A common understanding between contributing nations 
about levels of participation, resource allocation and national objectives is required 
to ensure a coherent and viable approach.  Responsibilities for coalition or alliance 
partners should be integrated into a single campaign plan, developed at the national 
and military-strategic level and designed to support an integrated approach.94
4.29. Security sector reform programmes. The military may support security sector 
reform programmes in both permissive and non-permissive environments.  This could 
include using military subject matter experts (for example, military police and service 
legal advisers).  Typical tasks may include:
• disarmament, demobilisation 
and reintegration95 of former 
combatants, including child and 
female soldiers;
• combating small arms and light 
weapons proliferation;
• transitional justice;
• strengthening the rule of law;
• counter-corruption and building 
integrity;
• de-mining; and 
• countering human, weapon and 
drug trafficking.
94  For NATO this would be a ‘comprehensive’ approach.
95  Disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration is sometimes expanded to include ‘reinsertion’ 
thereby becoming disarmament, demobilisation, reinsertion and reintegration.
SeSeSeSeSeSeSeSeSeSSeSeSecucucucuccucuuurirrririiriiiririiiiiitytytytytytytytytytytytytytytytytytttyyyyyyyy sssssssssssecececececcececceccctototottotottttoototottotoootooorrr rrrrrrrrrr rrrrr rrererererererererrererereererereefofofofofofofofofofofofofooofooffff rmrmrmrmmmrmrmrmrmrmmmrmrrrmm mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmayayayayayayayayayayayaayayayayyaayaayayyyayyyy hhhhhhhhhhhhheleleleeleelelelelelelelelelelp p p p p p ppppp ppp rererererererereeereststststststststts rururururururururururururururuururuuuruuctctctcctctctctctctcctctccccccturururururuuruuurururu eeeeeeeeee aaaaaaaaa stststststststtttsttttttatatatatatatatatattatate’e’e’e’e’e’e’e’e’e’e s ss s ssssssss
mimimmmimimimimmimmmimmmm lilliliililililiiliiiiliilliitatatatatatatatatatattatataaaatt rryryryrryryryryryryryyrryryryryyrry ffffffffffffffforororororororororrorororroo cececececececececcceee
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 94
4
4.30. Security sector stabilisation.96  Because implementing security sector reform 
can take considerable time, it may be necessary to conduct a short-term activity 
as a stop gap.  Security sector stabilisation seeks to enable essential and minimum 
security and justice to protect and promote a legitimate political authority and 
help prepare the foundations for transition to longer-term security sector reform.  
Although challenging to implement, security sector stabilisation can provide time 
and space for a political authority to gain legitimacy or acceptance, thus consolidating 
the process of achieving a political settlement.  Security sector stabilisation is 
intimately connected with, and dependent on, political and governance stabilisation 
activities.  Effective security sector stabilisation may provide a basis for other 
stabilisation activities and a bridge towards longer-term recovery, including security 
sector reform.  The latter needs a political settlement and sufficient government 
capacity to undertake holistic reform – such conditions may not exist early on in 
stabilisation environments.
4.31. Disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration.  Disarmament, 
demobilisation, (reinsertion) and reintegration programmes aim to contribute 
to security and stability in post-conflict environments to enable recovery and 
development.  This is a complex process with political, military, security, humanitarian 
and socio-economic dimensions.  These programs deal with the post-conflict security 
problems that arise when combatants are left without livelihoods and support 
networks during the vital period stretching between conflict, peace, recovery 
and development.  A successful disarmament, demobilisation, (reinsertion) and 
reintegration programme will help to establish a sustainable peace, while failed 
efforts will disrupt security sector refo rm, prevent peace processes and destabilise 
communities.  The primary attributes of such programmes include the following.
96  Stabilisation Unit Stabilisation Issue Note (SIN) – Security Sector Stabilisation , dated March 2014.
‘Security can’t wait for Security Sector Reform.  [There is] an increasingly relevant 
realisation from fragile and conflict affected states that although the establishment of 
state wide capable, accountable and responsive security and justice institutions is the 
only sustainable solution, this requires a stable but possibly elusive political settlement 
as well as substantial long term reform and capacity building.  In the meantime, it is 
critical to respond to security needs now.  A two speed approach is therefore required 
which stabilises the security situation in the short term principally through local actors 
whilst creating the conditions for longer term security sector reform.’
Stabilisation Unit
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
95
a. Disarmament is the management of arms that may include the collection, 
documentation, control and disposal of small arms, ammunition, explosives 
and light and heavy weapons of combatants, including civilians.  It also 
includes developing arms management programs.
b. Demobilisation is the formal and controlled discharge of active 
combatants from armed forces or other armed groups. 
c. Reinsertion is the assistance offered to ex-combatants during 
demobilisation to return to society, but prior to the process of reintegration.
d. Reintegration is the process by which ex-combatants acquire civilian 
status and gain sustainable employment and income. 
4.32. Security transitions.  Wherever possible, the host nation should have primacy 
for security.  In some cases, however, a transition of authority may be necessary.  
Once a secure environment has been established and public order restored, the 
international military force commander must transfer operations to an indigenous 
lead as soon as possible.  This will be a political judgement, informed by security 
considerations, and may be a transition to either an indigenous civil police lead 
(police primacy) or the host nation’s military.  Transition occurs when either the 
mission has been accomplished in accordance with a transition plan, or when the 
coalition partner governmental officials direct certain activities/missions to end.97  
Successfully transferring functions, duties and responsibilities from military forces to 
non-military or other military forces involve a number of key activities which include:
• conducting early 98 planning with the host nation, international 
organisations and non-governmental organisations;
• establishing workable objectives, goals and end-states;
• providing for adequate intelligence and communications to all agencies 
involved in the transition;
• ensuring unity of effort;
• harmonising the civil with the military effort; and
• establishing the appropriate command and control to manage the 
transition.
97  Further detail on transitions can be found in Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 6/11, Partnering Indigenous 
Forces.
98  Noting that, for example, the effective training of a police force can take several years.
Wherever 
possible, the 
host nation 
should have 
primacy for 
security.  
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 96
4
Military involvement in conflict prevention
4.33. Rapid response to conflict prevention and escalation.  As outlined in Chapter 
1, preventing conflict will invariably be preferable to countering it once it has started.  
An integral part of crisis management is preventing armed conflict by containing 
confrontation and preventing its escalation or expansion.  Situations are usually 
easier to stabilise when an intervention occurs quickly, thus reducing the likelihood 
of escalation.  Given sufficient political will, the military can respond rapidly, either in 
isolation, or as part of a wider effort, to an area of unrest.  Our Government will seek 
to prevent conflict through persistent modulated engagement using soft power for 
soft effect and reverting to hard power, where necessary, as a last resort.
4.34. Re-establishing enduring stability.  Often the root causes underlying crises 
can only be addressed effectively at the strategic level, through diplomatic and 
economic means, although this can be augmented by an implicit threat of military 
activity.  Consequently, crisis management and re-establishing enduring stability will 
demand an integrated, rather than simply a military, response.  The military’s capacity, 
expedience and firepower provides diplomats with added leverage to strengthen 
their influence over the protagonists.  Defence’s contribution to preventing and 
reducing violence is potentially considerable, and is an area in which the military 
could have primacy over civilian actors.  Specific roles for the military may include the 
following activities.
a. Defence Engagement.  Defence Engagement is the military contribution 
to soft power.  It may reduce or negate the need for military intervention to 
deal with emerging crises, develop an understanding of emerging threats 
or provide broader humanitarian assistance.  Defence exports, key leader 
engagement, capacity building through establishing training teams, delivering 
exercise programmes and arms control engagement can all help promote 
regional stability and reduce the risk of conflict.  However, conflict prevention 
is not confined to sequential activities pre-conflict.  While early Defence 
Engagement can reduce the likelihood of prolonged instability and prevent 
the need for more expansive and expensive military intervention, conflict 
prevention activities should also form part of any enduring campaign to 
reduce the possibility of escalation and to lay the foundations for a sustainable 
peace post-conflict.  Military intervention, or the threat of it, is hard power 
which may be used to achieve peace enforcement or prevent a crisis from 
escalating and spreading.  Preventing conflict is a key focus for our Armed 
Forces involved in Defence Engagement.  The success, or not, of this approach 
will often depend upon the level of understanding accrued by our forces.  As 
the Chief of Staff of the US Army, General Ray Odierno noted:
Given 
sufficient 
political will, 
the military 
can respond 
rapidly, either 
in isolation, 
or as part of 
a wider effort, 
to an area of 
unrest. 
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
97
“We have learned many lessons over the last 10 years, but one of the 
most compelling is that – whether you are working among citizens 
of a country, or working with their government or Armed Forces – 
nothing is as important to your long term success as understanding 
the prevailing culture and values.”99
b. The overseas network.  The UK’s network of Defence Attachés ensures that 
our Armed Forces and MOD are represented overseas with Defence Attachés 
having an integral role in our Government’s coordinated effort abroad, 
facilitating Defence relationships and enabling delivery of the International 
Defence Engagement Strategy and Defence operations.  Working in Embassies 
and High Commissions, they are the Chief of the Defence Staff’s representative 
and Head of the Defence Section working in support of Her Majesty’s 
Ambassador or High Commissioner.  They work to deliver our Government’s 
foreign policy priorities, which are complemented by MODs regional and 
sub-regional strategies.  They have a broad remit including, but not limited to:
• influencing in support of national objectives through developing 
close and effective bilateral relationships and regional awareness;
• promoting and protecting UK prosperity;
• supporting UK current and future contingent operations;
• promoting UK Defence credibility and capability;
• building international capability and capacity through security sector 
reform, arms control engagement, regional stabilisation and maritime 
security; and
• enduring insight and influence.
In addition, there are approximately 250 personnel deployed as part of 
Loan Service Teams in 18 countries.  Their roles are broad, depending 
on the requirement of where they are employed and can cover capacity 
building, advisory and mentoring roles, training delivery, technical support 
and expertise, support to staff colleges and undertaking executive roles in 
headquarters.  Some are host nation funded and will specifically support that 
country and its requirements while others may have a wider regional remit.
99 Regionally Aligned Forces: A New Model for Building Partnerships.   General R Odierno, 22 March 2012.
Our Armed 
Forces and 
MOD are 
represented 
overseas 
with Defence 
Attachés 
having 
an integral 
role in our 
Government’s 
coordinated 
effort abroad. 
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 98
4
c. Security force assistance.  Security force assistance (SFA) aims to improve 
the capability and capacity of a host nation or regional security organisation’s 
security forces and their supporting institutions.  Security force assistance 
will normally be part of a wider security sector reform programme (described 
previously) and can occur across the full range of military operations.  While 
security force assistance is primarily intended to help partner countries defend 
against internal and transnational threats, it may also involve assistance in 
countering external threats or enable participation in multilateral operations.  
Ideally though, security force assistance should be engineered to prevent 
crisis and conflict by providing the host nation with sufficient capacity to act 
alone in denying potential threats.  Security force assistance activities occur 
to support achieving specific objectives shared by our Government.  The 
purposes of such activities are to create, maintain or enhance a sustainable 
capability or capacity to achieve a desired end-state.100  
4.35. The remainder of this chapter explains how the military contribution to 
building stability fits within the 3Ps framework.  This section uses a descriptive 
approach and attempts to give examples of the 3Ps activities, noting that these will 
often complement and overlap with each other. 
P1 – Protect political actors, the political system and the population
4.36. Establish security.  Within a security sector, the initial response by military 
forces is to establish a safe environment, provide security and help facilitate stability 
during and after an armed conflict or a disaster.  The military may enforce cessation 
of hostilities and monitor ceasefires and peace agreements.  Military forces also 
work to establish the conditions necessary to begin disarmament, demobilisation, 
(reinsertion) and reintegration activities. 
100  More detail on security force assistance is available in AJP-3.16, Allied Joint Doctrine for Security Force 
Assistance.
Section 3 – Specific military activity in the 
3Ps framework
Where violence persists, a minimum precondition for stability is providing sufficient 
security for the population to go about their daily lives and for the host nation 
government to function.
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
99
4.37. Protection options.  A commander 
can employ a range of techniques (some of 
which may be contentious) including:
• static protection of key sites, 
for example, market places and 
refugee camps;
• persistent security in areas secured 
and held, for example, intensive 
patrolling and check points;
• targeted action against 
adversaries, for example, search or 
strike operations; and
• population control, for example, 
curfews and vehicle restrictions.
4.38. Protection and support.  Military forces may also provide protection and 
support to key civilian personnel to ensure their continued contribution to the overall 
stabilisation operation, as well as protecting and maintaining critical infrastructure 
until the host nation can assume these responsibilities.  Military personnel may be 
required to:
• protect government-sponsored civili an reconstruction and stabilisation 
personnel and resources;
• protect contractor and civilian reco nstruction and stabilisation personnel 
and resources;
• provide emergency logistic support;
• protect and secure critical infrastructure, natural resources, civil registries 
and property ownership documents;
• protect and secure strategically important institutions (such as government 
buildings, medical and public health infrastructure, the central bank, national 
treasury, integral commercial banks, museums and religious sites); and
• protect and secure military depots, equipment, ammunition dumps and 
means of communication.
ThThThhThhhThhhhThT eeeee e eeeeeee mmmimimimmmmmmm lilililitatataatataataaarrryyyyryr wwwwilililllllllllllll wwwwowowwwwowowwwowwowowwwwowow rkrkkkkkkkkkkkkkkk ttttttooooooo seseseseseseseeeeeeseessecucuc rererererereeerereererereeeeeeeeeee aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaandndndndndndndndndndndnddndndndndndnndnndndnddnnd sssssssssssssssssererererererererereererererereeeeeeee veveveveveveveveveveveevevevevevvveveveveevvvev tttttttttttttttttheheeheeeeee pppppppopopopopopo ullulllulataatatatatataatiioiooooioioooon
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 100
4
Explosive hazards, such as minefields and unexploded ordnance, inflict stress on the 
population while restricting freedom of movement, hindering international trade and 
distracting from the ability of the fragile state to secure its borders and boundaries.  
Removing these hazards improves the safety, security and well-being of the local 
population while promoting the free movement of people and materials within the 
host nation. 
4.39. Secure and serve the population.  The indigenous people are the decisive 
‘terrain’.  Together with host nation partners, the military will work to provide the 
people with security, give them respect and gain their support.  They also facilitate 
establishing local governance, restoring basic services and reviving local economies.
4.40. Hold areas that have been secured.  Once an area has been secured, it should 
be held.  The local people will need to believe that they will not be abandoned by 
either the international security forces or their indigenous partners.  A reduction in 
force numbers and overall presence should be done gradually; rather than handing 
off or withdrawing completely.  A degree of situational awareness should be retained 
after the transfer of responsibility to local security forces.
4.41. Situational awareness to inform protection of people and assets.  With its 
ability to access even the most remote areas, air intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance is often vital for providing timely situational awareness in unstable 
regions.  This may be a precursor to deploying joint forces or possibly informing the 
global community which can help clarify the situation on the ground.  Air (and space) 
surveillance may act as a restraint in developing conflict situations by exposing the 
actions of those involved to international scrutiny.  If stabilisation operations are 
well-established, air intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities are 
likely to lie at the heart of intelligence gathering efforts across a broad spectrum of 
activities.
4.42. Providing humanitarian assistance.  In extreme situations where development 
or humanitarian agencies are absent, international military forces may be required 
to provide a limited amount of essential services including emergency shelter, 
medical or food aid.  However, the military delivering such aid may further politicise 
humanitarian assistance and will not always be welcomed by external agencies.  
Further detail on humanitarian assistance can be found in Allied Joint Publication 
(AJP)-3.4.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Humanitarian Assistance.
4.43. Developing secured areas.  As well as isolating the adversary from the 
population, securing key areas helps to support economic activity, enable major 
infrastructure projects and encourage effective governance and rule of law.  Once 
the situation allows, such areas should be consolidated and expanded.  It will be 
 The indigenous 
people are 
the decisive 
‘terrain’. 
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
101
critical to bring the weight of the integrated approach to bear at the right time and 
place.  Concepts such as secured development zones can provide a focal point by 
concentrating security, local governance and development effect and so enable them 
to be mutually reinforcing.  Rapidly integrating local government apparatus, including 
security committees, together with initiatives that generate local employment and 
economic growth will be critical to maintaining security and stability.
4.44. Border control.  A  central component of civil security is the ability of the host 
nation to monitor and regulate its borders.  Border controls are necessary to regulate 
immigration, control the movement of the local population, collect excise taxes or 
duties, limit smuggling and control the spread of disease.  As with other areas, the 
personnel used for these roles must be identified and vetted to ensure that potential 
adversaries do not inadvertently reintegrate into society where they could potentially 
plant the seeds for future adverse activities against the host nation’s government and 
its agencies.
4.45. Economic stimulation.  Providing protection for the population stimulates 
economic activity and supports longer-term development and governance reform.  
Importantly, it also generates confidence in local people about their own local 
security situation – their collective human security – and an economic interest in 
ongoing stability.  This also denies adversarial groups one of their principal strategies 
for expanding their support base.
Kosovo 1999
In 1999, the United Nations (UN) Security Council authorised the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to 
protect the population in Kosovo.  Robust military intervention improved physical security 
for much of the population, including the Serb communities.  Improving physical security did 
enable progress on immediate stabilisation objectives, such as creating a stable civilian police 
force and the Kosovo Protection Corps.  This also enabled progress on longer-term state 
building objectives, such as institutional reform of the security and justice sectors.  However, 
because the improvement in security was not matched by political progress on the status 
of Serb enclaves in Kosovo, there was no prospect of drawing down KFOR because lack of 
external protection could well lead to a resumption of violence.
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 102
4
P2 – Promote, consolidate and strengthen political processes
‘The central challenge of stabilisation is to bring about some form of political 
settlement in a pressured and violent context.’101
4.46. As already explained, much of the mi litary contribution across the 3Ps will 
overlap.  In particular many of the activities outlined within this section that relate to 
the security and justice sectors will also be very relevant to the subsequent section on 
preparing for the longer-term recover (P3).
4.47. The military contribution to political processes.  There are identifiable military 
tasks in supporting political processes.  Whichever activities are undertaken, the 
primacy of civilian leadership in this area is paramount and due care and attention 
must be given to ensuring that military and civilian actors have frank and open 
channels through which to decide how and when to ask military personnel to support 
101  The UK Government’s Approach to Stabilisation 2014.
Helmand, Afghanistan 2008-14
In Helmand, Afghanistan, the Provincial Reconstruction Team supported District Community 
Councils in seven districts.  These councils applied a modified election/selection process 
in-line with the tribal structures in Helmand that remain a key component of both formal 
and informal governance.  Since 201 1, the councils were re-elected and the number of local 
people participating in the election process has increased.  
There have also been notable shifts regarding the elders who are elected, meaning that 
more significant elders are becoming involved, including in areas within districts where 
communities had been less connected to government and had chosen not to be represented 
in the earlier elections.  These councils bolstered the executive branch of government in 
Helmand by reaching out to communities and by addressing security and justice issues.  
They became the Provincial Government’s first port of call when dealing with disputes 
in districts.  Importantly, these councils not only articulated their districts’ priorities for 
development they operated sub-committees formally tasked with holding local security and 
justice actors to account (and provided an accountable mechanism for operating informal 
justice mechanisms).
These relationships in particular provided an important stabilisation effect as central 
Helmand emerged from overwhelming violent conflict.  Furthermore, the provincial 
approach meant that coordination was necessary with DFID-supported national 
programmes to ensure that the councils helped promote state building in the province, 
linked to national processes.  The initial stabilisation activity has now become a longer term, 
more sustainable, state-building approach.
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
103
political processes.  This is particularly important in hostile environments where 
civilians may not have the level of access and freedom of movement that military 
personnel have.  Military tasks are likely to include facilitating freedom of movement 
(for specific actors), identifying interlocutors and spoilers to political processes, 
protecting political systems, infrastructure and individuals and monitoring nascent 
and actual peace agreements (such as ceasefires or non-escalation pacts).
4.48. The military contribution to governance.  Determining the military 
contribution to governance will require an understanding of what constitutes ‘good 
enough’ governance in context.  Local security levels will affect the capacity of 
international forces to contribute to wider governance.  Given limited resources of 
time, money, troops and organisational capacities, prioritising those tasks that may 
fall to the military will be essential.  Where possible, governance activities should be 
implemented by international civilian agencies and enabled, only where necessary, by 
the military.  In non-permissive environments, civilian access will be limited.  However, 
security is usually conditional on a degree of popular consent and this, in turn, may be 
conditional on restoring basic governance.  Accordingly, military forces may be drawn 
into those governance areas essential for early progress.102  Military substitution for 
absent civilian actors should be temporary and civilian expertise must be integrated 
into planning from the outset.
4.49. Demonstrating progress and legitimacy.  Those opposing the government 
will exploit perceptions of injustice by depicting the state as ineffectual and corrupt, 
and international forces culpable by association.  Consequently, for the stabilisation 
campaign to succeed, it will be essential to show progress towards a security sector 
that is effective, legitimate, transparent, accountable, just and subject to the rule of 
law.  The UK contribution is likely to be determined by a team drawn from DFID, FCO, 
MOD and the Home Office, and may range from providing temporary training teams 
to rebuilding whole areas of defence and national security.  Societal conflicts create 
ideal conditions for the proliferation of predatory armed groups, criminal networks 
and an increase in opportunistic crime.  For many, conflict and criminal activity 
becomes their livelihood.  In turn, the population’s experience of state security forces 
can be extremely negative including security forces that perpetrate human rights 
abuses or weak and corrupt judicial systems. 
4.50. Planning assessments.  One of the key starting assumptions for any planning 
should be considering the nature of the political settlement and the incentives and 
calculations of key political figures in relation to the security and justice sectors.  The 
security environment may inhibit the ability of civilian actors to operate and, in the 
absence of indigenous and international civilian agencies, the commander may need 
102 Military commanders should have an understanding of the local power brokers to try and ensure that 
one group is not adversely affected by sponsoring another.
Where 
possible, 
governance 
activities 
should be 
implemented by 
international 
civilian agencies 
and enabled, 
only where 
necessary, by 
the military. 
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 104
4
to conduct a pre-assessment based on assumptions.  A full assessment should follow 
as soon as possible.  The assumptions may include:
• the likely role, size, structure and bu dget of the military and police forces, 
judiciary and penal systems;
• priorities for early capacity building (for example, whether the military or 
police take priority) and within this, what security capabilities are needed 
first, and at what scale, to support this campaign; and
• the need for immediate disarmament,  as a security imperative, ahead 
of any full disarmament, demobilisation, (reinsertion) and reintegration 
programme.
4.51. Host government ministry reform.  UK military and MOD civilians may provide 
advice to host government officials within a range of ministries.  Assistance may 
include advice on policy, strategy, risk assessment, capability development, budgets, 
resource management and procurement.
4.52. Governance tasks.  Local confidence is likely to be enhanced by demonstrable 
participation of host nation authorities.  International forces should work through 
government agencies to generate local capacity and influence.  We must be prepared 
to become involved in tasks for which we have to carry out much of the planning and 
delivery, but for which ultimate responsibility lies with local authorities.  Stabilisation 
and reconstruction teams are examples of integrated civil-military organisations that 
enable governance and reconstruction activity to be coordinated where the security 
situation prevents civilians from working freely.  Tasks in which the military may 
find themselves involved (as enablers) could include restoring judicial institutions or 
reforming the security and justice sectors.
4.53. Restoring judicial institutions.  In many developing states, the primary sources 
of justice are traditional ones.  These include tribal elders, religious authorities 
and informal local courts administering long-held rules and customs.  During the 
initial stages of a campaign, military forces may be involved in identifying local key 
leaders and any informal justice mechanisms to help incorporate them into the 
reform process.  International forces may also be required to start refurbishing or 
reconstructing facilities, possibly including court houses, police stations and prisons.
4.54. Reforming the security and justice sectors.  Figure 4.2 shows that the security 
and justice sectors deliver a fundamental function of government (second only to 
defending borders) and help form a cornerstone of state sovereignty and the rule of 
law.  In addition to military forces, intelligence services, militia and police, the security 
and justice sectors also include: 
International 
forces should 
work through 
government 
agencies to 
generate local 
capacity and 
influence.  
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
105
• judicial, policing and penal systems;
• oversight bodies;
• the Executive;
• parliamentary committees;
• government ministries;
• legislative frameworks;
• customary or traditional authorities; and
• financial and regulatory bodies.
When functioning effectively, the security and justice sectors contribute to a 
generally safe environment for the population.  These sectors also contribute to wider 
regional security, for example, through effective coastal and border protection.  
4.55. Challenges to reform.  Ideal preconditions for reform will rarely exist 
because justice and security underpin a country’s balance of power and, in some 
circumstances, the fragile political settlement from which a government’s authority is 
derived.  Attempts at reform may challenge vested interests and upset existing power 
relationships.  Therefore, reform is primarily a political undertaking and not simply a 
technical activity.
4.56. The military contribution to reform.  Opportunities to drive through change 
may result from the negotiations leading to a political settlement, for example: on the 
back of initiatives to demilitarise society; as clauses within formal peace agreements; 
as conditions attached to foreign aid; or following elections.  If possible, the security 
sector reform analysis to establish the scope of the reform programme – and by 
Figure 4.2 – The security and justice sectors
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 106
4
implication the military contribution – would result from a full assessment involving 
both the host nation government and international partners.  It would include:
• the priorities of other nations involved  in providing equipment, training and 
infrastructure;
• an estimate of the pace and cost of reform;
• an agreement with the host nation government regarding the size, shape, 
role, governance arrangements (including transparency and accountability) 
and priorities for its security and justice sectors; and
• an agreement on the broad structures of the security and justice sectors 
and their impact on society.
4.57. Security force capacity building.  As explained previously, security sector 
reform will be an important part of stabilisation across several areas.  The number 
of forces required to carry out security tasks in stabilisation may exceed those 
needed during conventional combat operations.  There are hard choices to be made 
between allocating UK troops for concurrent capacity building and allocating them 
for operations to isolate and neutralise adversaries, recognising that the demands of 
these separate tasks require different skills and structures.  Ultimately, success will 
involve recruiting, training and possibly equipping indigenous security forces and 
embedding with them.  Today, when UK and other allied nations have fewer forces 
than in the past, investment in capacity building is ever more important and the 
long-term sustainability of effective host nation forces will be essential to maintain 
security.103
4.58. Police transition.  Once an acceptably secure environment is established and 
public order restored, the commander should consider moving from an international 
military security lead to an indigenous lead.  This will be a joint political and security 
judgement.  There are at least two options: 
• transition from international forces to an indigenous military security lead; 
or 
• transition direct to a civil (police) lead – police primacy.
In either case, the international community is likely to be asked to assist the host 
nation government to generate basic policing capacity so that the rule of law can be 
seen.104
103 More detail can be found at Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.16, Allied Joint Doctrine for Security Force 
Assistance. 
104 More detail can be found at AJP-3.2.3.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Military Police.
 In the majority 
of cases, police 
primacy should 
be the ultimate 
goal.
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
107
4.59. Police primacy.  In the majority 
of cases, police primacy should be 
the ultimate goal as it can bolster the 
perception of progress and reinforce the 
impression of hostile groups as criminals 
rather than freedom fighters.  This also 
demonstrates the host nation government’s 
commitment to governing through the 
rule of law.  Effective police primacy may 
be unachievable until relatively late in 
the campaign and attempts to establish 
police primacy prematurely can be 
counterproductive.  Coalition military 
forces will eventually hand over their 
responsibilities to other military forces.  
These could be under the control of NATO, the UN or the host nation.  The ultimate 
goal of transition is to transfer all functions performed by coalition military forces 
to host nation control.  Since the UK has no equivalent of a gendarmerie, military 
commanders may become involved in policing and interior security matters.  
Commanders may need to improvise using military police and other re-roled forces, 
augmented with any deployable police specialists that are available from contributing 
nations.  Host nation police primacy should always be the ultimate goal.
4.60. Developing indigenous police services.  Where possible, the responsibility 
for ongoing internal security should be taken by a non-military police force with a 
mandate for law enforcement and strong links to the judiciary.  Ideally, this involves 
creating a community-based police service, with a clear separation between the roles 
of the police and the military.  However, while police primacy for internal security 
remains the goal, community policing models assume a level of consent which is 
unlikely to be achievable in the midst of violent conflict.  The policing model must be 
realistic and care must be taken to ensure that it does not undermine any longer-term 
police development.  Military support to the police should take place under civilian/
police leadership.  Coalition security forces may need to lead on police basic training, 
leaving specialist training, such as evidence handling and forensic investigation, to 
others who may be private contractors.105
4.61. Developing resilience.  The purpose of capacity-building is to build the 
legitimacy of the fragile state which then ensures resilience.  Achieving security is 
fundamental, but that activity must be connected to realising the strategic purpose.  
To build legitimacy and resilience, international partners also need to assist the 
105  Further detail can be found in the Stabilisation Unit paper,  Policing the context: Principles and guidance 
to inform international policing assistance,  March 2014.
PoPoPoPoP lllililiiccececeeceecece ppppppppriririririrririmamammmmmamaamamm cycycyccycy sssshohohohhohohohohohohhhohhooooooooooh uluulululululuululululululuulluluuuu d ddd d dd ddddddddddddddddddd bebeeeebbeeebeeeebbbbbbbbebe the uuuultltttttttttltimimmimimimimimimmmatatatatatatatatattatattatta ee eeeeeeeeeeeee gogogogogogogogogogogogogogogog aaalalalaaaaa
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 108
4
fragile state to build, and pay for, its own reliable police and armed forces.  Properly 
organised and trained, local police and military are key to securing public support, 
gaining intelligence and maintaining security.
4.62. Border forces.  Effective border control is essential to combat regional 
criminality and prevent foreign fighters from moving freely.  Customs and 
immigration duties are also often a major source of government revenue where there 
is no significant natural resource.  International forces may be tasked to patrol borders 
and mentor customs, immigration and border control agencies.
4.63. Intelligence and security services.  Intelligence and security services are 
normally located within central government, reporting directly to senior decision-
makers.  In conflict-affected countries, intelligence and security services are routinely 
misused, often acting as a repressive arm of the state.  There may also be rivalry 
between the intelligence and security services and the armed forces which should be 
monitored.
4.64. Building capacity to contribute externally to international security.  When 
working with a country’s armed forces, the aim is not only to build their internal 
capacity, but to enhance their support to international peacekeeping missions.  For 
example, British Peace Support Teams in South Africa and Kenya support the training 
of the Regional African Standby Forces.  
4.65. Sustainable capacity.  Building and deploying credible forces for international 
security builds trust and pride among the domestic population.  Creating professional 
and capable forces will ultimately reduce the need for future UK interventions.  This 
also enhances the legitimacy and resilience of peacekeeping missions.  The system 
of UN reimbursement for mandated operations allows a state to maintain security 
capability without it being a fiscal drain on precious national resources.  Although 
peacekeeping soldiers are paid for by their own government, the UN reimburses 
member states that provide equipment and support services to peacekeeping 
operations.  
The British-led International Military Assistance and Training Team in Sierra Leone is another 
good example of how a sustained training effort can deliver a capability for continental 
peacekeeping.  Ten years after the bloody civil war in 2002, 1000 members of the Republic 
of Sierra Leone’s Armed Forces completed training prior to joining the African Union 
Mission in Somalia.  This is a good example of partner nations taking a more prominent 
role in providing security in their regions.  This may also have a stimulating effect on 
neighbouring states who witness progress and development.
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
109
4.66. Engagement and conflict resolution.  
Societal conflicts are rarely resolved quickly or 
decisively – negotiated settlements are usually 
necessary locally and nationally.  International 
forces are likely to be involved in negotiations 
that help communities connect with the 
government.  Typical tasks may include:
• providing a secure environment for 
negotiations;
• direct and regular engagement with 
key elites and government authorities;
• settling disputes, for example, over 
land and property seizure;
• public outreach and information 
programmes; and
• enforcing ceasefires and support to 
transitional justice arrangements.
4.67. Supporting elections.  Fair and secure 
elections can be useful political processes.  
However, if elections are conducted too early 
they may provoke an increase in violence.  The 
commander should assess their likely impact 
on security and advise the host nation government and international agencies 
accordingly.  Considerations include:
• how local elites, government author ities and international organisations 
are perceived locally and nationally will impact the plan for delivering an 
election;
• where possible, elections should be  implemented by the host nation 
government; and
• whether international authorities may be required to deliver the election 
where local authorities generate feelings of intimidation and insecurity.
4.68. The effect of money on security.  Money can have an immediate impact 
upon security and this can be either positive or negative.  Money can be used 
for direct security programmes such as funding indigenous forces, or indirect 
consent-winning initiatives such as settling specific grievances before they become 
sources of disaffection and resentment.  Conversely, large influxes of money into 
Faiririii aaaaaaaaaaaandnd ssececururruruu ee ee elellellecececttitittititiitititiionononnnnnnnonnnnnnnnnnnnnnnsssssss cacaaaaaaaaaacannnnn bebebbebeebeeeeeebbb uuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuseeses ffffufufuufffuulllll ppopopopoopoppopoopppp lllllilililillititititititititiicaaacaaaacccccccc ll prprrprrrrrrroooccoooo esessesseseeeessss
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 110
4
post-conflict environments can destabilise the economy or become a significant 
driver of corruption.
4.69. Corruption.  The ability of the armed forces to achieve mission goals – be that 
in defence capacity-building or military operations in complex environments – can 
be fatally undermined by corruption if the threat it poses is not recognised and 
counteracted.  Training and capacity building which are usually part of upstream 
conflict prevention are at risk of failure if corruption and weak management 
hollow out the cohesion, capacity and legitimacy of indigenous forces.  Corruption 
in recruitment and promotion, for example, can reduce the effectiveness and 
sustainability of training if the wrong people are nominated to attend courses.  (This 
was the case in Mali, where the US and France provided training.)  Corruption within 
the supply chain can divert vital resources which will, in turn, limit the capability 
even of well-trained forces to achieve a meaningful effect.  While capacity building 
in the defence sector is increasingly likely to occur as part of an integrated approach 
within the Defence Engagement framework, it will still retain a large element 
of military-to-military activity.  Therefore, the military must be able to identify 
corruption and recognise the adverse effects it can potentially have on their mission. 
4.70. Stabilisation operations, may inadvertently exacerbate corruption levels 
through unintended support for malign local actors, which in turn can fuel the 
growth of criminal or terrorist networks.  Injecting significant resources into the 
operational environment (for example, through contracts or military assistance 
projects), combined with a lack of effective monitoring, can result in wasting scarce 
resources if project implementation is not verified.  This can also create opportunities 
for corrupt practices.  In Afghanistan, a lack of accountability within some military 
supply chains led to the armed forces’ resources being redirected to the insurgents 
and directly strengthening those opposing the NATO International Security Assistance 
Force forces.  Such instances will likely lengthen the duration of a campaign and cost 
more lives.  Consequently, countering corruption should be an essential component 
of planning at all levels for the military contribution to stabilisation. 
4.71. Anti-corruption.  Anti-corruption measures can directly affect those elites on 
which a political settlement depends and stabilisation missions will often encounter 
resistance.  International forces may need to support anti- and counter-corruption 
measures, including:
• integrating coalition efforts to reduce  the threat that corruption poses to 
mission success; 
• developing and promoting norms of c onduct for indigenous security forces 
and governments; 
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
111
Local knowledge 
and an 
assessment 
about who 
wields local 
influence will 
be critical in 
determining 
what is likely to 
work.  
”
“
• establishing and promoting proced ures and arrangements supporting 
the norms of conduct and including anti-corruption safeguards such as 
whistle-blower protection; 
• ensuring security forces are properly paid and that those funds are 
accounted for to reduce opportunities for corruption; 
• training security forces to manage corruption threats and monitoring their 
effectiveness; 
• protecting and supporting key rule of law actors, including police, 
prosecutors and the judiciary;
• tracking the movement and destinatio n of aid (such as food and clothing) 
and weapons; 
• overseeing contract implementation and management procedures, for 
example, in channelling reconstruction funds to local suppliers; 
• monitoring contract implementation to ensure delivery and reduce 
opportunities for diversion of resources; and
• tasking intelligence cells to focus on  corruption mapping during planning 
to ensure that the actions of the force do not inadvertently increase the risk 
of corruption.   
Collectively, these measures can help international forces ensure that their actions 
do not exacerbate corruption threats and will help develop legitimate, accountable, 
and ultimately more effective indigenous forces.   We should expect resistance to the 
notion of public accountability at first.  Ultimately, if corruption threatens campaign 
progress, then international partners may need to make their support conditional 
upon host government reform.
4.72. Non-state governance.  Where local institutions are absent or ineffective, 
then alternative forms of non-state governance may exist based on a mix of coercion 
and local incentives.  In such instances, there may be no choice but to create new 
authorities from scratch.  Local knowledge and an assessment about who wields 
local influence will be critical in determining what is likely to work.  New 
institution-building initiatives could make matters worse by eroding the local, 
informal capacity, in which case strengthening local forms of governance may be a 
better option.  
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 112
4
Local capacity-building guidelines for the military commander
Consult widely.  Develop relationships with a broad set of indigenous actors.  It is dangerous 
to select or empower local leaders, not least due to the risk of misjudging the ability of local 
elites to gain the confidence of the population.  Take an inclusive approach and work with a 
broad spectrum of indigenous actors.
Foster local ownership.  Prioritise tasks so that we concentrate on delivering what people 
really want according to their circumstances (for example, demands will differ between urban 
and rural areas) and avoid supply-driven initiatives dominating the agenda.  Encourage locals 
to take the lead.
Look beyond the state.  Important capacities exist outside state institutions – within civil 
society; tribal groups; religious organisations; and the private sector.  These capacities will be 
crucial gap-fillers in the short term, and even when formal state institutions strengthen, they 
are likely to remain a source of local influence and parallel capacity.
Balance effort.  Improved stability requires a balance of effort between capacity-building 
initiatives and those activities that are aimed at stopping the violence.
Aim for transition from the start.  Plan for transition to international civilian or host 
government agencies to help manage local expectations about ongoing external support.  
This keeps the imperative for indigenous self-reliance at the forefront of measuring campaign 
success.  Transition planning should be based on realistic benchmarks being met, balanced 
with time imperatives.
DeDeDeDDDeDeeDeeeeeeveveveveveveeveeeveeveveveelololoololoolololoolooloolooolololooooloolopppppppppppppppppppppppp rerrrrrerr lalaaaaaaatititititittiitititiiitiiiit ononononononononoooooonono shshshshshshshhshshhhhhshsssshssshipipipipppipipipippppssssssssss wwiwiwiwwiwiwwwwiww ththththhhthth aaaa bbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbbrorororoororooadadadadddddddd ssssssssseteeetetettetettttettteeeteeteett ooooooooooooooooffffffffff ffffff f iniiinininninndidididididididididididdididiidid geggegegegegggegegegeegeeegeeegegegg nonononoononoonnonononooonooonooooususssusussuuuuuuuuss aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaactcttctctcttctttttorororoooororoorororrooroo sss
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
113
P3 – Preparing for longer-term recovery
4.73. Sustained systemic effort.  The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) has determined that government transformations can take 
30-40 years which illustrates the need for a long-term approach.  Experience has 
shown that ‘train and equip’ initiatives are often both ineffective and unsustainable 
unless they are linked with more far-reaching governance reforms.  There is no 
‘quick-fix’ for fragile states and sometimes aid flows in at a rate beyond a state’s 
capacity to absorb it.
4.74. Developing internal capacity.  The physical security of the state and its citizens 
is recognised as a cornerstone of sustainable economic and social development.  
Capacity development is a major and complex challenge.  Despite substantial donor 
funds dedicated to building capacity over the past decades, the lack of sustainable 
country capacity remains one of the main reasons why many developing countries are 
failing to meet their development goals.  Capacity development refers to the ability 
of people and organisations to define strategies, set priorities, solve problems and 
achieve results and is, therefore, a much broader concept than training and technical 
assistance.  
4.75. The military contribution to development.  There are fundamental differences 
in both approach and time frame between stabilisation and development.  
Development activity focusses on reducing poverty, which in a fragile state usually 
centres on addressing long-term structural causes of conflict and instability.  In 
contrast, stabilisation activity focuses on the much more immediate task of creating 
106 DFID, Building Peaceful States and Societies , page 37. 
107 World Bank, World Development Report 201 1, Washington D.C. page 10, 2011.
‘Stabilisation, state building and peace building together combine short-term actions to 
establish good enough security and stability with actions to address the structural causes of 
conflict, poverty and instability over the medium to longer term.  This enables us to engage 
earlier (e.g. pre-peace process) and more effectively in an ongoing conflict.  And it helps 
us to fill the gap between violent instability and the establishment of normal diplomatic, 
development and security relations.’
Building Peaceful States and Societies106
‘Even the fastest-transforming countries have taken between 15 and 30 years to raise their 
institutional performance from that of a fragile state.’
World Development Report 201 1107
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 114
4
an environment within which political resolution and longer-term processes (such as 
development) might eventually occur.
4.76. Conflict can be a driver of poverty and vice versa.  UK forces will often find 
themselves working overseas alongside targeted development programmes.  The 
key UK Government stakeholder delivering overseas development assistance is DFID.  
The military commander should therefore understand the drivers underlying the 
DFID approach to enable effective cooperation.  DFID is responsible for managing our 
Government’s aid to developing countries and supports longer-term programmes 
to help tackle the causes of poverty, such as conflict and state fragility.  This work 
forms part of a global promise to support progress towards the UN Millennium 
Development Goals.  DFID is required by law to comply with the International 
Development Act (2002) which stipulates that funds must not be spent on military 
equipment and that expenditure must contribute to the overall goal of reducing 
poverty.
4.77. Working with DFID and other development actors.  At the strategic level, 
cooperation between DFID and the military may involve integrated assessments and 
developing shared objectives.  At the operational level, it will require cooperative 
implementation planning or pre-deployment training.  At the tactical level, it could 
involve the secondment of DFID development advisers into deployed military 
headquarters or the military delivering DFID-funded projects.  In addition to DFID, 
there could be an array of development organisations within the area each with their 
own aims and objectives.  Commanders should seek to build relationships with the 
more significant of these organisations.  They should assess the potential effects 
these projects could have on stability within the region, as well as on their own 
security operations.  Commanders should seek to coordinate their activities with 
those of the host nation and development agencies, ideally within a single, integrated 
theatre plan.
cu
Devevelopmpment acctitivivityty ffococ
ususeses oonn rerer duducicicccingng ppovoverertyty
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
115
4.78. Protecting development.  In a permissive environment, the military 
contribution to economic and infrastructure development will be minimal and 
based on maintaining security.  In volatile environments, adversaries may target 
development workers, be they government or non-government, indigenous or 
intervening, military or civilian.  Commanders should be aware of the potential risks 
development workers face within their area of operation and consider what priority 
should be afforded to their protection.  In circumstances where civilian agencies 
are unable to deploy, international forces may be requested to initiate specific, high 
priority, localised development tasks.  These may include:
• generating employment opportunities;
• infusing money into local economies;
• restoring and protecting essential infrastructure; or
• supporting the restoration of market activity.
4.79. Harnessing local resources.  The commander should, where feasible, use 
local knowledge, skills, manpower and materials as well as link local development 
initiatives to national priorities, programmes and structures.  The military presence 
may have a significant impact on local economies and the advice of civilian specialists 
will be vital.
4.80. Restoring essential services.  Local services, such as food, water, sanitation, 
shelter and medical care all contribute to human security.  These may have 
deteriorated over time or been destroyed through violent action.  Essential services 
may need to be restored at the outset when the security situation is weakest.  
The military contribution will support local and international humanitarian and 
development organisations to expand their footprint.  Where these agencies cannot 
operate, the military contribution will be limited, but could include:
• restoring potable water supply and sanitation – while respecting local 
customs (for example, Afghan women may only have the opportunity to 
socialise outside their homes at the local well);
• enabling power and fuel provision;
• assisting local authorities to reopen markets; and
• restoring local hospitals, schools and clinics.
4.81. Growth requires a stable and secure environment.  In helping to deliver 
a stable and secure environment, the military will always have a significant, if 
indirect, contribution to make.  There may also be times when more direct military 
Local services, 
such as 
food, water, 
sanitation, 
shelter and 
medical care 
all contribute to 
human security. 
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 116
4
involvement in economic development will be necessary, as discussed previously.  
Although security and governance reform remain priorities, early attention to 
economic growth increases the likelihood of success.  While economic measures and 
reconstruction are not a panacea for stability, they can make a contribution.  Priorities 
for international agencies include measures designed to:
• stabilise the economy, protect an d reconstruct critical economic 
infrastructure;
• generate employment; and
• address any underlying economic drivers of conflict.
4.82.  Infrastructure repair.  The military has 
limited capacity and expertise to undertake 
civil infrastructure repair.  Military engineers 
may be used but, wherever possible, 
commanders should encourage using local 
resources and skills.  Long-term infrastructure 
development is the responsibility of the host 
nation ministries or departments; supported 
by specialist contractors and development 
agencies.  The aim must always be to work in 
close conjunction with host nation and civilian 
agencies.
4.83. Reconstruction and development.  Infrastructure is fundamental to economic 
recovery, for example:  
• transport networks allow freedom of movement, trade and social 
interaction;
• telecommunications systems support every element of society; and
• power generation facilities are vital for economic production.
The military contribution to infrastructure development is likely to be an enabling 
one.  However, in environments where civilian agencies are absent or unable to move 
freely, the military contribution could include:
• as a priority, repairing and protecting, national transportation infrastructure 
(airports, roads, bridges, railways, ports);
• restoring and protecting essential telecommunications infrastructure;
MMMMMiMiMiMiMiMM lilililitatatatataaatatataaarryryryyryryryry ccconontrtrtrtrtrtrrtrttribibiibiibibiiiiibutuuututuututuutututututuuuttiiioioioiooioioooiiiioioionnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn ttotttotototottttttttott iiiinfnffnnn raaaaaarastststststsstststs rurur ctcturure e ded veloopmpmeenntttttttt
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
117
Developing 
the capacity 
of people and 
systems is as 
important 
as bricks 
and mortar 
reconstruction.
”
“
• repairing and protecting important commercial facilities and key assets 
associated with economic production, import and export (vital for revenue 
generation);
• repairing and protecting key power ge neration facilities and distribution 
systems; and
• training and developing indigenous expertise.
4.84. Local civil development.  Some level of local security, rule of law and national 
governance are the necessary conditions for re-developing indigenous economic 
and institutional capacity.  The US Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction 
identified five principles of reconstruction.108 
a. Security is necessary for large-scale reconstruction to succeed.
b. Developing the capacity of people and systems is as important as bricks 
and mortar reconstruction.
c. Soft programmes (governance and economic development) serve as an 
important complement to military operations in insecure environments.
d. Programmes should be geared to indigenous priorities and needs.
e. Reconstruction is an extension of political strategy.
4.85. Prioritising projects.  When prioritising and sequencing infrastructure projects, 
it is useful to distinguish between infrastructure associated with essential government 
services such as hospitals, schools, water, power generation and sanitation, and 
infrastructure associated with the country’s economic capacity such as transport links, 
telecommunications and significant commercial facilities.  Whilst both are important, 
the former are associated with the immediate well-being of the population while the 
latter are essential for economic recovery.
4.86. Sustainable projects.  Although airports, railways, ports and communications 
facilities may represent iconic projects, if they are not manned by air traffic controllers 
and ground crew, train drivers, shipping masters and engineers to maintain them, 
they are unsustainable.  One damaging aspect of long-term conflict is that highly 
trained people, critical to the economy, leave the country and do not return.  This 
means there is a need to train a new generation – something that takes significant 
time and effort.
108  A Final Report from the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction , dated March 2013.
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 118
4
4.87. Economic considerations.  Monetary policy is fundamental to stabilising an 
economy.  Military involvement is likely to be limited to enabling the safe passage of 
World Bank or International Monetary Fund officials to key ministries and meetings, 
and ensuring the security of critical financial institutions, infrastructure and stockpiles.  
The international force should also be careful not to undermine monetary policy 
by, for example, making large cash payments in foreign currency and should 
instead reinforce currency stabilisation initiatives by making payments to legitimate 
contractors in the local currency at local rates.  Economies cannot stabilise until levels 
of violence begin to fall, allowing local people to re-establish normal patterns of 
economic life.
4.88. Encouraging growth.  While reducing violence is likely to stimulate restoring 
normal economic activity, local growth may depend on targeted international 
development assistance.  If international interventions are successful, growth will 
be self-sustaining.  Consequently, successful businesses expand and begin making 
longer-term investments, entrepreneurs reappear and locally financed reconstruction 
can resume.  Fluctuating violence will have an effect on local economic conditions.  
Once areas have been secured, they have the potential to become important centres 
of economic recovery.  Plans should identify mechanisms for accessing development 
funds and channelling them into areas that are held at the necessary tempo.  When 
international forces and agencies occupy an area they stimulate economic recovery 
through increased demand for goods and services as well as targeted development 
initiatives.  In some circumstances, international forces and agencies may sponsor 
large-scale employment programmes (cash for work programmes) as a temporary 
solution to mass unemployment.  These are often low-wage job opportunities for 
unskilled workers and are designed to minimise interference with more traditional 
and profitable sectors.  Such initiatives, however, should be translated into sustained 
employment prospects based on traditional transactions among the local population.
4.89. Supporting specific economic sectors.   The agricultural and fishing sectors are 
often central to the well-being of the population.  Commanders should familiarise 
themselves with local crops and seasonal cycles and understand how these are used 
by adversaries to generate funds and how they may relate to surges in the level of 
violence.  The location of markets, areas of primary production which support them, 
and the transport routes and storage facilities en-route are all critical components of 
the sector.  The commander may be required to ensure safe access from the farm gate 
to market and security for local consumers.  In some circumstances, direct assistance 
to producers will be required to accelerate both the recovery of agricultural and 
fisheries production.  Possible military tasks include:
Economies 
cannot stabilise 
until levels of 
violence begin 
to fall.
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
119
• repairing the enabling ag ricultural and fisheries infrastructure (irrigation 
systems, power generation and distribution systems, fishing vessels and so 
on);
• providing supplies, including an adequate supply of fuel; 
• protecting post-harvest storage facilities; and
• providing mediation for land or fisheries disputes.
4.90. Local labour.  While hiring local labour and issuing contracts boosts 
incomes and generates broader economic growth, care should be taken to 
minimise potentially disruptive effects on local labour markets, in particular, pay 
scales.  International forces should seek to avoid creating large disparities in wages 
between that which can be earned on the local market or working for the host 
government and that which is possible working for international forces and agencies.  
Commanders usually need to remunerate local staff at higher levels to attract quality 
personnel and compensate for added risks associated with supporting international 
forces.  However, salaries should not be so far above local market rates that they 
entice skilled workers or professionals to leave important jobs in the community 
for less important, but better paying, jobs working for international actors.  It is 
particularly important to get this right with respect to security force wages.  Local 
personnel working for international forces should not make more money than those 
working for the indigenous army or police.
4.91. Risks and benefits of development.  The commander should consider who 
benefits and who risks exclusion from development initiatives and programmes, 
and the potential negative effects.  A particularly useful tool is the Red Cross Better 
Programming Initiative.109  This explores the potential impact of development 
programmes on the connectors and dividers between people, allowing planners 
to gauge more accurately the likely effects of programmes and projects on conflict 
dynamics.  Experience shows that delivering aid may exacerbate the conflict by 
having the following unintended consequences.  It may:
• be misappropriated by adversaries;
• distort local markets;
• benefit some groups and not others, causing further tension;
109  See International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, https://www.ifrc.org/en/what-
we-do/disaster-management/preparing-for-disaster /disaster-preparedness-tools/better-programming-
initiative/.
Experience 
shows that 
delivering aid 
may exacerbate 
the conflict 
by having 
unintended 
consequences.  
”
“
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 120
4
• substitute for local resources, freeing them up for further conflict; and/or
• legitimise the cause of competing factions and adversaries.
4.92. In a stabilisation context in particular, any external (including military) 
development-related activity must be guided by consideration of how it might 
impact on the legitimacy of the state and/or local authorities.  For example, 
substituting state service delivery is unsustainable and may directly undermine the 
legitimacy of the state/local authorities.  As a minimum, ensure that the authorities 
are seen to be planning, coordinating and monitoring delivery by third parties; 
specifically, they are in charge and responsible for delivery, even if not actually 
delivering themselves.  Likewise, it should not be assumed that simply by delivering 
projects that the area will become more stable.  The way in which such initiatives are 
implemented is what is key; do they bring communities, local leaders and authorities 
together in a way that builds relationships, improves state-society relationships and 
strengthens the legitimacy of local authorities and the state?  When in doubt, we 
should be guided by the ‘do no harm’ principle.110
4.93. Quick impact projects.  Quick impact projects (QIPs) are characterised as 
short-term, small-scale, low-cost and rapidly implemented initiatives that are 
designed to deliver an immediate and highly visible impact, generally at the tactical 
level.  Their primary purpose is to generate consent for the presence of military forces 
(both host nation and international) and, where possible, to generate confidence in 
the host government.  Local measures to reinforce security effect may sometimes be 
possible through such projects.  For UK Armed Forces, sources of funding include the 
centrally funded Conflict, Stability and Security Fund – most likely to be approved 
at the country level – or funds made available by MOD.  It is essential that QIPs are 
consistent with local needs and priorities and adhere to Stabilisation Unit guidelines.  
It should be noted, however, that the value of QIPs is contested.  Unless they are 
part of a carefully coordinated and integrated approach, they can frequently be 
destabilising and create divisions within and between communities. 
110 ‘Do no harm’ is one of the United Nation’s humanitarian principles.
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05
4
121
Key points
• Any military involvement will always be  part of the wider integrated approach.
• Understanding is a critical comp onent of stabilisation activities. 
• The primary, and often immediate, role of the UK military will be to contribute to 
providing a safe and secure environment. 
• Stabilisation operations require multiple lines of activity, only some of which are 
suited to military leadership and implementation. 
• Security is a key enabler, without which other vital development cannot take place.
• If a country’s capacity for facilitating and protecting its own economic activities is 
compromised, either through conflict or natural disaster, the military may be used 
to help re-establish these.
• Defence Engagement is the military contribution to soft power.  It may reduce or 
negate the need for military intervention to deal with emerging crises, develop an 
understanding of emerging threats or provide broader humanitarian assistance.
• All actions should be planned and executed to support the narrative.
• The indigenous people are the decisive ‘terrain’.  Together with host-nation 
partners, the military will work to provide the people with security, give them 
respect and gain their support.
• The central challenge of stabilisation is to bring about some form of political 
settlement in a pressured and violent context.
• Once an acceptably secure environment is established and public order restored, 
the commander should consider moving from an international military security 
lead to an indigenous lead. 
• Even the fastest-transforming countries have taken between 15 and 30 years to 
raise their institutional performance from that of a fragile state.
• UK forces will often find themselves working overseas alongside targeted 
development programmes. 
Operational considerations and the military contribution

 JDP 05 122
4
Notes
Operational considerations and the military contribution

JDP 05 123
A
Annex A – Defence 
Engagement inputs/activities 
categorisation
Category Activity type Sub activity type
Visits (inwards/
outwards)
High-level international 
engagement (HLIE), including 
inward visits
Ministerial visit1
Chief of Staff visit2
Top official visit3
Working-level international 
engagement, including inward 
visits and work of Foreign 
Liaison Staff
Conference/seminar4
2* visit
Staff talks and visit
Ship visit5
Unit visit 
Aircraft visit
Sport visit
Ceremonial/musical visit
Conference/seminar
Support to Foreign Defence Attachés 
in UK
Other working-level international 
engagement6
1 UK ministers outbound, foreign ministers inbound.
2 CDS, CNS, CGS, CAS, CJFC, VCDS, PUS (4* military and civilian).
3 3* military/civilian.
4 Includes financing, sponsoring, hosting and attending inbound, outbound and third party conferences and 
seminars.
5 Includes visits in support of Defence exports.
6 Including work with think tanks.
Defence Engagement inputs/activities categorisation

 JDP 05 124
A
Category Activity type Sub activity type
Personnel, 
resources and 
enablers
UK presence in host nation 
(under UK Embassy)
Defence section
Non-Resident Defence Attaché
Regional conflict advisers
Civilian defence adviser
Other presence in host nation
Embedded personnel
Loan service personnel
Exchange officers
Support to multilateral organisation
Other embedded personnel
Foreign embed in UK post
UK resources and enablers
Provision of UK facilities and 
infrastructure
Provision of equipment
Provision of UK intelligence/
information
Provision of UK logistic/engineering 
support
Provision of access, basing or 
overflight (ABO) rights in UK
UK involvement in joint projects 
(including science and technology)
Other UK resources
International agreement/
memorandum of understanding
Support to Defence exports
Participation in trade/air show
Equipment demonstration
Defence and security industry day
Defence section support to exports
Other export activity or support
Defence Engagement inputs/activities categorisation

JDP 05 125
A
Category Activity type Sub activity type
Training and 
education
Routine training/education
International Defence Training (IDT) 
– Tier 17
IDT – Tier 28
IDT – Tier 39
UK places on foreign course
Masters programme
English language training
Other courses
Short-notice or bespoke training
Regionally Embedded Training Team10
Short Term Training Team (STTT)11
Training for UK Forces by host nation
Training for UK Forces by UK
Adventure training
Other short-notice or bespoke 
training
Exercises and 
operations
Defence exercises
Combined bilateral exercise in host 
nation
UK support to host nation exercise
UK exercise in host nation
Training for UK forces by UK (for 
example, BATUK or BATUS)
Foreign observers at UK exercise
Multinational exercise
NATO exercise
UK observers at a foreign exercise
Other exercise
Operations
Partnered operation
UK operation
Enabling support to UK-led operation
Other operation
7 Education and training courses ‘that are considered to be of the highest security cooperation value and are 
regularly over-subscribed’.  (Joint Service Publication (JSP) 510, International Defence Training, paragraph 0504).  It covers 
key officer career courses and initial officer training.
8 ‘Courses of international security cooperation value, where demand for places does not normally exceed capacity.’  
(JSP 510, paragraph 0507.)
9 ‘Courses of lesser or no international security cooperation value.’ (JSP 510, paragraph 0508.)  Can include Cranfield 
University and Defence Academy courses.
10 For example, permanently based overseas and established (can be international) for example, BMATT, BPST(EA), 
IMATT – training is bespoke.
11 Majority operating abroad, wide range of potential activities, organised as a response to a need.
Defence Engagement inputs/activities categorisation

 JDP 05 126
A
EsEsEstatat blisshihiiiiihiingngnnnnnn wwwwwwwwwwayayaya sss ofofof wwworooorooo kikingngngngng mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmoooooroororororrrooo e e ee e eeeeee ccclclcclclclclososososooso elelelelelely yy yy y wiwiwwiwwithththththh oooooooooooooththththththtththththththhtht erererererererereererererrr iiiiiiiiiiiinnntntntntntntnntntnntnnnttnntntntteeerererererrerererererrerreeeeeeeeee nananananananananananananannananatittiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiononononononononononononononononoononononooonalalalalalalalalalalalalalllla aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaactctctctctctctctctctctctctctctctctctcttcttcttttoroooorooorooroooroorororo s s s s ss iissssssiissssssss importatataaaaaaantntntntntnnntntntntntntntntnttntntntnntt
Defence Engagement inputs/activities categorisation

JDP 05 127
B
Annex B – The UK’s principles 
for stabilisation operations 
and programmes
Cluster 1: The central element – the primacy of politics (Principles 1 and 2)
1.  Work within the political context. 
2.  Ensure local political sustainability.
In-line with the UK approach to stabilisation, the ‘principles’ start with the ‘primacy of politics’.  
Without a full understanding and consideration of the local and national political context and 
its dynamics, stabilisation interventions will have little chance of success.  This cluster makes 
clear that the UK Government is a political actor, working in complex political contexts, to 
achieve a political end, and always needs to consider its own role within these dynamics.  It 
reiterates the need to ensure that any longer-term solution needs to be grounded in local 
political sustainability.
Cluster 2: Success factors – minimise internal obstacles (Principles 3 and 4)
3.  Enable strong leadership and management. 
4.  Integrate and coordinate appropriately.
As a political actor, the UK Government is primarily concerned with maximising its impact 
on a situation.  The complexity of stabilisation environments means that there are invariably 
significant external challenges to contend with, over which we often have limited influence.  
Working together effectively as one Government, however, is within our control, and likely 
to lead to a greater overall UK impact.  This does not mean endless navel-gazing, but means: 
engaging across Government to identify common interests; effective leadership in setting 
objectives, and continually testing them in the light of changing circumstances; coherent 
and integrated delivery mechanisms; and efficiently managing resources to deliver defined 
priorities.  Beyond our Government, establishing ways of working more closely with other 
international actors is also important.
The UK’s principles for stabilisation operations and programmes

 JDP 05 128
B
Cluster 3: Success factors – flexible and responsive engagement (Principles 5, 6 and 7)
5.  Plan iteratively. 
6.  Analyse continually. 
7.  Deliver contextually.
Stabilisation contexts are often rapidly shifting, which means that what is appropriate or 
feasible often changes and needs to be constantly reviewed.  For stabilisation activities to 
make an effective contribution to the overall goal, there needs to be an ongoing process of 
analysis, planning and evaluation.  This gives our Government the scope to adapt and respond 
to the changes in the environment.
Cluster 4: Success factors – relationship management (Principles 8 and 9)
8.  Engage broadly. 
9.  Communicate coherently.
Stabilisation interventions are necessary when the political structures for managing 
competing relationships and interests have broken down and violent conflict has broken out.  
Interventions, therefore, require us to operate outside normal channels and think through 
how to engage with those outside established state structures.  This cluster reflects the need 
to engage with non-state actors, including armed groups, and promote the participation of 
marginalised groups to create the foundations for stability.  Stabilisation environments are 
often plagued with misinformation and rumour which can inhibit stabilisation activities and 
undermine impact.  Stabilisation practitioners should therefore be aware of how the wider 
population perceives developments and ensure that these stakeholders are aware of activities 
being undertaken and the rationale behind them.  Effective two-way communication is part of 
the political dialogue that will determine the impact of stabilisation.
Further detail on the UK Principles for Stabilisation Operations and Programmes can be found in 
the Stabilisation Issue Note (SIN) dated October 2014.1 
1 http://www.sclr.stabilisationunit.gov. uk/publications/stabilisation-series
The UK’s principles for stabilisation operations and programmes

129JDP 05  
Lexicon
Lexicon
Part 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
AAP  Allied administrative publication
AJP  Allied joint publication
BSOS  Building Stability Overseas Strategy
CAS  Chief of the Air Staff
CDS  Chief of the Defence Staff
CJFC  Commander Joint Forces Command
CNS  Chief of the Naval Staff
CRI  Countries at Risk of Instability
CSSF  Conflict, Stability and Security Fund
DCDC  Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
DFID  Department for International Development
EU  European Union
FCO   Foreign and Commonwealth Office
HMG  Her Majesty’s Government
IDES  International Defence Engagement Strategy
IDT  International Defence Training
JACS  joint analysis of conflict and stability
JCN  joint concept note
JDN  joint doctrine note
JDP  joint doctrine publication
JSP  joint service publication
MOD  Ministry of Defence
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NSC  National Security Council
NSO  National Security Objectives

130  JDP 05   
Lexicon
NSRA  National Security Risk Assessment
NSS  National Security Strategy
OECD  Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
OLRT  operational liaison and reconnaissance team
PUS  Permanent Under Secretary
QIP  quick impact project
SDSR  Strategic Defence and Security Review
SFA  security force assistance
SIN   Stabilisation Issue Note
UN  United Nations
VCDS  Vice Chief of the Defence Staff

[Page 141: No extractable text]

[Page 142: No extractable text]

