Third Edition
Joint Doctrine Publication 1-05 
Personnel Support for
Joint Operations

[Page 2: No extractable text]

i
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 
Joint Doctrine Publication 1-05
Personnel Support for Joint 
Operations
Joint Doctrine Publication 1-05 (JDP 1-05) (3rd Edition),  
dated July 2022, is promulgated as directed 
by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre

Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via:
 
E-mail: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk Telephone: 01793 31 4216/4220
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2022) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated).
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbeywood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk
Distribution
All DCDC publications, including a biannual DCDC Publications Disk, can be 
demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre. 
  
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet (RLI) at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/defnet/JFC/Pages/dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
ii
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 

iii
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Foreword
Delivery of success on joint operations is essential to the Defence purpose. 
Furthermore, people lie at the heart of operational capability, meaning that 
Defence must attract and retain the right numbers of capable, motivated 
individuals to deliver Defence outputs. This dependency upon our people 
requires Defence to maintain a credible and realistic offer that earns and 
retains their trust. Deployment on operations is for many the pinnacle of their 
service, the very reason they joined and stay, but it can also have a significant 
impact on them and their families. We therefore need focused personnel 
support measures for deployed operations, where necessary encompassing 
the whole force and including families where appropriate, which apply to all 
stages of deployed operations; during preparation, sustainment throughout 
deployed operations, until recovery activity has concluded. The world and 
workplace continue to change, so Defence has to remain flexible, adapt to 
unpredictable events and, as a result, be prepared to deploy our people 
quickly and effectively. It is therefore imperative that personnel support 
systems, processes and activities are equally agile and efficient. 
This joint doctrine publication provides the necessary guidance and practical 
understanding of what is required to deliver the moral component of fighting 
power; to support and sustain the whole force in ways that ensure their 
physical and mental requirements are addressed.
Lieutenant General James Swift OBE  
Chief of Defence People


iv
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 

v
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Preface
 
Purpose
1. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 1-05, Personnel Support for Joint 
Operations, 3rd Edition, guides operational commanders and planning staff 
in understanding joint personnel support. It covers key aspects of support 
activities for personnel deployed on operations overseas and in the UK. 
Context
2. People are fundamental to sustaining fighting power and maintaining 
national resilience, and this is enabled during operations through personnel 
support. This JDP recognises that personnel support, although coordinated by 
the Joint Task Force Headquarters and normally carried out by the Joint Force 
Logistic Component or national support element, is largely delivered by the 
front line commands.
Scope
3. JDP 1-05 describes personnel support at the strategic, operational and 
tactical levels of operations, outlining why a joint personnel support framework 
is needed and how it is planned and employed. JDP 1-05 acknowledges the 
whole force approach and outlines the responsibilities of commanders and 
the joint operational staff for supporting personnel deployed on operations 
at home and overseas. Where appropriate, JDP 1-05 signposts the relevant 
specialist joint Service publication.
Audience
4. The guidance contained in this JDP is applicable across all operations: in 
the homeland, undertaking persistent engagement and crisis response, as well 
as warfighting overseas. It is pertinent to be read by commanders and their 
staffs.

vi
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Structure
5. JDP 1-05 has five chapters. The contents of each chapter is outlined 
below.
a. Chapter 1 – Introduction. Chapter 1 introduces personnel support 
for joint operations. It outlines the moral component of fighting power and 
re-emphasises the whole force approach. This chapter also describes 
personnel support activities, the delivery of personnel support and 
command and control.
b. Chapter 2 – Personnel support activities. Chapter 2 outlines the 
key supporting functions that are relevant to personnel support for joint 
operations.
c. Chapter 3 – Preparing, planning and projecting. Chapter 3 outlines 
the key factors that commanders and staff must take into account when 
preparing, planning and projecting personnel support for joint operations.
d. Chapter 4 – Sustaining personnel support. Chapter 4 outlines 
personnel management to ensure that operations are sustained by trained 
and motivated personnel. It also covers casualty and compassionate 
management and mortuary affairs.
e. Chapter 5 – Recovering combat power. Chapter 5 describes 
operational recovery and the importance of managing personnel once 
their contribution to operations is over.
Linkages
6. JDP 1-05 should be used in conjunction with Allied Joint Publication 
(AJP)-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations  and AJP-5, 
Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  for greater detail on the 
preparation and employment of the physical component. AJP-3.13, Allied Joint 
Doctrine for Deployment and Redeployment  also describes considerations 
around the movement of the whole force to and from operations.

vii
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Chapter 1 – Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – Personnel support activities. . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Chapter 3 – Preparing, planning and projecting  . . . . . . . . . 35
Chapter 4 – Sustaining personnel support . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Chapter 5 – Recovering combat power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91

[Page 10: No extractable text]

Section 1 – Personnel on operations  . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – The moral component. . . . . . . . . . . 4
Section 3 – The composition of the force  . . . . . . . 6
Section 4 – Personnel support activities . . . . . . . . 10
Section 5 – Delivering personnel support  . . . . . . . 11
Section 6 – Command and control  . . . . . . . . . . 12
Chapter 1 introduces personnel support for joint operations. 
It outlines the moral component of fighting power and 
re-emphasises the whole force approach. Chapter 1 also 
describes personnel support activities, the delivery of 
personnel support and command and control.
1
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Chapter 1

”
“We have world-leading Armed 
Forces, full of high-quality 
women and men, Regulars 
and Reservists, backed by their 
ever-supportive families and 
our civil servants, and with a 
precious and privileged position 
in the heart of the nation. We 
need to retain that special place.
Admiral Sir Tony Radakin KCB ADC,  
Chief of the Defence Staff, Royal United Services 
Institute lecture, December 2021
2
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Chapter 1
Introduction
Section 1 – Personnel on operations
1.1. Military capability is delivered by people. Success on operations 
overseas and the Ministry of Defence’s (MOD’s) contribution to national 
security and resilience at home demands sufficient trained, equipped and 
motivated personnel. Achieving this throughout an operation, including 
activities to generate, deploy, sustain, recover and recuperate, demands good 
leadership and effective personnel support. This includes all functions and 
activities undertaken for the effective and efficient employment, health and 
well-being of personnel.1 It also enables and assists Regular, Reserve, Civil 
Service and contractor personnel – described collectively as the whole force 
– whether they be deployed overseas on an operation, supporting operations 
remotely or on resilience operations at home. 
1.2. The components of fighting power are covered in detail in Joint Doctrine 
Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine with ‘personnel’ recognised as 
a Defence line of development. People enable the creation of military effect 
through a combination of the physical, conceptual and moral components. 
Personnel support maintains the terms and conditions of service that underpin 
the moral component of fighting power. Balancing the components of fighting 
power throughout the operational cycle of force generation, deployment, 
sustainment, recovery and recuperation is essential to maintain the 
effectiveness of both the force and the individual. Personnel support provides 
the processes to assist the commander in achieving this.
a. Physical component. The physical component provides the 
means to operate and fight and is delivered through the Defence force 
development process. Defence lines of development provide a common 
range of essential factors to support force development, and personnel 
is a key aspect. Pre-deployment training is essential to ensure 
personnel are ably prepared for their role. Physical training, adventurous 
training and sport all enable the levels of stamina and fitness required 
1 It does not include, but is closely linked with, the health care functions of the Defence 
Medical Services.
3
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

on operations. The physical component is maintained during operations 
through in-theatre training.
b. Conceptual component. The conceptual component provides 
a framework of thinking within which military personnel can develop 
understanding about both their profession and the activities they may 
have to undertake. The ability to apply doctrinal principles and previous 
education and training, in a manner appropriate to the situation, allows 
the conceptual component to enhance fighting power.
c. Moral component. The moral component focuses on our willingness 
to fight. Personnel support assists commanders in maintaining the morale 
of personnel on operations and strengthens their own position as a leader.
Section 2 – The moral component
1.3. The moral component is about establishing and sustaining our people’s 
will, ultimately, to fight. Warfare is a human activity and whilst equipment, 
technology, training and doctrine may confer significant advantage, it is the 
moral component, and the morale of the force in particular, that will often 
prove decisive. To achieve our tasks, personnel with the highest degree of 
commitment, self-sacrifice, forbearance and mutual trust are required. In return, 
they must receive good equipment, effective organisation, structured training 
and strong leadership. 
1.4. Military service is unique in that Service personnel are required to:
• operate across a complex spectrum of activity;
• cooperate with allies, partners and host-nation organisations under 
the scrutiny of government, society and the media, both at home and 
abroad;
• be available to deploy in support of UK government policy;
• consent to hard and realistic training, authority and sound discipline;
• acknowledge the political and legal responsibilities of our actions; and
• accept a potentially unlimited liability to lay down their lives in the 
service of the nation.
Personnel support activities enhance the moral component so that Service 
personnel are best placed to perform the operational aspects of being in the 
Armed Forces.
4
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Morale
1.5. Leaders are responsible for the morale of those they lead and the 
maintenance of morale is a principle of war. It is delivered through three 
mutually supportive elements, as illustrated in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1 – Morale
1.6. Leadership, followership, culture, integrity and motivation underpin the 
unique moral cohesion without which UK Armed Forces would not have the 
determination to succeed. Understanding how morale can be influenced 
through these elements, and how they interact, is an important aspect of 
identifying how commanders can inspire the will to fight. Commanders should 
consider all three elements in detail.
a. Belief. An individual’s belief that what they are doing is right is 
fundamental to morale. That viewpoint may arise from personal beliefs, 
knowledge of national support or the desire to do right by their colleagues.
Fight for
a cause
Right kit,
right task
Fair
deal
Professionalism
and pride in
one’s ability
Challenging
targets
Deployment
welfare support
Inspire
the will
to ﬁght
Belief
Material
Credibility
5
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

b. Credibility. As well as being relevant to the operation, tasks must be 
seen to be worthwhile, even if menial. Personnel will expend great effort, 
providing that activity is in support of the overall aim. Nugatory work or 
superficial activity is likely to result in falling morale. Credibility is also a 
personality trait, built on honesty, integrity and competence; credibility 
develops trust and people will follow leaders they trust.
c. Material. The balance between absolute trust in the leader’s 
purpose and acceptance that a fair deal is being gained is achieved 
through the material return to the individual. 
Section 3 – The composition of the force
1.7. The fundamental principles that influence the force mix are known as 
the whole force approach. This ensures that Defence goals are achieved by 
high-performing, fully integrated, well-led teams of capable and skilled people 
drawn from our Regular and Reserve UK Armed Forces, the Civil Service and 
contractors. Some challenges still apply to managing the whole force and may 
inevitably limit the full benefits that would be possible. Examples of these include:
• political – for example, limitations on the numbers of civilian and 
military personnel;
• procedural – rules and regulations that apply to the employment of 
different categories of people; and
• cultural – the nature of the relationship between the MOD and 
contractors.
Single-Service differences
1.8. Commanders should be aware that there are some single-Service 
differences in personnel management styles and procedures, and cultural 
differences in the deployed workforce. These reflect each Service’s own 
unique customs, traditions and working practices. However, the starting point 
should be one of parity of treatment wherever possible as any unjustified 
differences will erode morale. In joint operations, commanders may have to 
balance expectation and address any perceived disparity in treatment.
6
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Reserves
1.9. Reserve Forces play a key role when Regular Forces cannot be 
committed to fulfil all requirements of an operation at home or overseas. The 
fundamental purpose of the Reserve Forces is to:
• support each Regular Force when it is operating at, or beyond, its 
declared maximum effort;
• provide augmentation and resilience – either in significant numbers 
or in specialist roles; and
• connect, integrate with and influence the community it is working 
alongside.
1.10. The nature and strength of the Reserve Forces varies between the three 
Services. The Reserve Forces Review 2030 will see an overhaul of the Reserve 
Forces framework, but there are currently several different types of Reserve 
7
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction
Each Service has its own unique customs, traditions and working practices

Service in use (all are subject to the Reserve Forces Act 1996) until the new 
design is established.2
a. Volunteer Reserve Forces. The Volunteer Reserve Forces 
comprises civilians who accept an annual training commitment and a 
liability to call-out for mobilised service; this includes the Royal Navy 
Reserve, Royal Marine Reserve, Army Reserve and the Royal Auxiliary 
Air Force. The willingness to be mobilised requires the individual’s 
agreement and consultation with their employer.
b. Regular Reserve. The Regular Reserve comprises ex-Regular 
personnel who, on leaving, retain a liability to call-out. In some limited 
and specific circumstances, volunteer civilians also serve in the Regular 
Reserve.
c. Sponsored Reserves. Sponsored Reservists are employees whose 
employers have an agreement with the MOD (usually a contract) to 
provide support services and they are members of a Reserve Force in 
a special sponsored Reserve category. Sponsored Reserves can have 
specific characteristics.
 o Sponsored Reserves have special liabilities for Reserve Service, 
training and call-out.
 o The contractor will be responsible for employing sufficient 
employees to meet the MOD’s requirements.
 o Terms and conditions of service are based on those for 
conventional volunteer Reservists but modified to take account 
of the special liabilities and commercial relationships involved.3
 o Although Sponsored Reserves are not called out under the 
authority of a call-out order, the call-out must be authorised by 
the Secretary of State for Defence or delegated authority.
d. Full Time Reserve Service. Full Time Reserve Service is a period 
of service (generally between six months and four years) undertaken by 
2 Reinforcement, operational and strategic Reserves.
3 Army Sponsored Reserves are paid directly by the contracting company, not via Joint 
Personnel Administration (JPA); however, they do receive the benefits of the deployment 
welfare package.
8
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Reservists in a designated appointment on a full-time basis. There are 
three categories of commitment: full, limited and home commitment. 
Those serving on limited or home commitment would have to be 
mobilised to deploy on operations.
e. Additional Duties Commitment. Reservists may volunteer for 
formal part-time work for a specified duration up to a maximum of 
180 days (including leave) in a 12 month period.
f. Volunteer ex-Regular Reserve. Using the skills and experience 
gained from service within the Regular Forces, Volunteer ex-Regular 
Reserve (VeRR) personnel can be mobilised to deliver specific outputs.
Deployed civil servants
1.11. The MOD deploys significant numbers of civilians each year, directly 
supporting those on operations. MOD civil servants work alongside our Armed 
Forces personnel in theatre, often performing specialist roles (for example, 
specialist finance or commercial roles). While deployed, most civilians sit within 
the military chain of command. The commander of any deployed force has 
overall responsibility for the conduct and safety of all MOD civilians deployed 
within their formation. The senior civilian 
manager in theatre, usually the Civil 
Secretary (CIVSEC), reports in the first 
instance to the deployed commander, 
although they will have a dual reporting 
chain and will often report on policy 
matters to Permanent Joint Headquarters 
(PJHQ).
1.12. When deployed, the CIVSEC 
undertakes the day-to-day management 
of the civilian component, which 
includes carrying out typical duty of care 
responsibilities. The CIVSEC may wish to 
escalate serious issues to the deployed 
commander. Additionally, the commander 
can (and should) intervene on any issue 
where they believe it is having an adverse 
effect on operational effectiveness  
and/or the safety and security of the 
9
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction
MOD civil servants work alongside our Armed  
Forces personnel in theatre

deployed formation. In the event of an emergency, MOD civilians are to follow the 
orders and advice of military colleagues.
1.13. Support to Operations. The civilian Support to Operations (S2O) team 
in PJHQ coordinates personnel support arrangements for deployed MOD 
civil servants. Civil servants from other government departments remain the 
responsibility of their parent department. MOD civilians receive theatre-specific 
pre-deployment training and are then tracked into theatre. Once in theatre, MOD 
civilians are manually tracked by J1 (personnel) staff and the in-theatre CIVSEC. 
Contractors on deployed operations
1.14. The policy for contractors on deployed operations is detailed in Joint 
Service Publication (JSP) 567 , Contractor Support to Operations. In addition, 
Defence Condition 697 , Contractors on Deployed Operations, details the 
contractual terms and conditions of service. Defence Standard 05-129, 
Contractors on Deployed Operations: Processes and Requirements  details the 
standards, processes and procedures to affect delivery of services to military 
commanders on the ground. 
Section 4 – Personnel support activities
1.15. Personnel support has close links with other combat service support 
functions, especially movements, medical support and real life support. Personnel 
support for operations staff are responsible for the following functions.
• Administration – including personnel tracking, pay and allowances, 
appraisal reporting, honours and awards, cashier services, discipline, 
Service inquiries and captured, interned and detained persons 
tracking.
• Welfare – including connection with the home base, entertainment, 
access to retail facilities, operational fitness provision and pastoral care.
• Casualty and compassionate management – including compassionate 
travel, aeromedical evacuation and repatriation of the deceased.
• Operational stress management – including trauma risk management 
records, operational stress management records and decompression.
10
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Section 5 – Delivering personnel support
Delivery method
1.16. A key element in delivering the moral component is providing personnel 
support to all those on operations. To achieve this, personnel support should be 
delivered as far forward as is operationally possible, while recognising the merits 
of minimising the number of personnel in theatre.
Maximising personnel support
1.17. Personnel support functions from different units should be combined into 
a joint organisation wherever possible. This minimises the number of personnel 
support staff and allows cross-fertilisation of ideas and experience. Reachback 4 
to additional specialist support should be provided through the operational 
headquarters. This is particularly important for disciplinary, terms and conditions 
of service, and allowance issues where rules may vary between the Services, 
deployed civil servants and contractors.
4 Reachback is the term used to describe the ability to communicate directly back to 
headquarters and other capabilities in the UK.
11
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction
A key element in delivering the moral component is providing personnel support to all  
those on operations, which includes elements such as fitness provision and entertainment

Section 6 – Command and control
Strategic-level command and control
1.18. The UK’s command and control framework defines authority and 
supports command decision-making.5 It enables staff to communicate 
personnel priorities and other instructions to subordinates and other 
organisations to then execute. To provide the necessary level of personnel 
support to the joint task force commander, or joint military commander, 
processes for exchanging personnel information and a clear understanding of 
authority between deployed units and the strategic base must be established. 
1.19. The Defence Crisis Management Organisation (DCMO) provides the 
UK government with military advice and it is the MOD’s collective body for the 
overall management of crises and the higher direction of operations. At the 
strategic level, command and control mechanisms will usually be conducted via 
the DCMO between PJHQ for overseas operations and Headquarters Standing 
Joint Command (UK) for national resilience operations. 
Operational-level command and control
1.20. Front line commands are responsible for delivering the necessary forces 
for the operational commander. Single-Service chiefs retain full command 
responsibility for their own personnel. Full command is defined as: the military 
authority and responsibility of a commander to issue orders to subordinates.6 This 
is distinct from operational command exercised by the operational commander. At 
the operational level, commanders should understand that:
• arrangements for command and control of personnel will be adjusted 
to suit the situation;
• extensive operational commitments will most likely require augmentees;
• a scalable joint task force headquarters (JTFHQ) may be formed for 
overseas operations or a joint military commander may be stood up 
for UK resilience operations;
5 See Allied Joint Publication-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations , 
paragraph 1.78 for more details on degrees of authority in operations.
6 Note: The term ‘command’ as used internationally, implies a lesser degree of authority 
than when it is used in a purely national sense. No NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] 
or coalition commander has full command over the forces assigned to them since, in 
assigning forces to NATO, nations will delegate only operational command or operational 
control. NATOTerm.
12
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

• a single integrated headquarters or individual component 
commanders will be employed as appropriate;
• a deployed personnel support element may be required in a Joint 
Force Logistic Component Headquarters (JFLogCHQ); and
• multinational operations will have a UK national contingent component 
and national support element, responsible for UK personnel support.
Command and control of personnel
1.21. The operational commander will have a designated deputy chief of staff, 
or assistant chief of staff J1/J4 (Logistics), to direct personnel planning and 
provide personnel advice. There is no single model for the command and control 
of personnel and a range of models may be employed. In small-scale operations 
of limited duration, the core J1 staff will retain a high degree of centralised 
control, including both operational- and tactical-level personnel issues.
1.22. As the complexity or duration of an operation increases, the relevant 
headquarters staff may be augmented by specialist J1 staff to provide 24-hour 
staff coverage and the full spectrum of J1 staffing requirements. Additional J1 
staff could be drawn from front line commands or other MOD organisations. 
This could include deployed MOD civilian specialists recruited via the S2O 
programme. Larger-scale operations may require augmentation to both the 
operational headquarters J1 staff and devolved, tactical-level personnel 
administration teams.
Component commanders
1.23. Component commanders are normally delegated operational control 
of assigned forces, although in certain circumstances the operational 
commander may only grant tactical command.7 The operational commander 
will establish the command relationships and division of responsibilities 
between component commanders. There are likely to be additional personnel 
tasks at theatre level, especially in multinational operations where responsibility 
for the various personnel elements must be clearly set out in agreements 
between troop contributing nations.
7 As is common in UK operations.
13
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Requirement for a personnel support element of the Joint 
Force Logistic Component
1.24. A JFLogCHQ is likely to be deployed when the scale or complexity of 
the operation exceeds the capability of the operational headquarters J1/J4 
staff. It may include a specific personnel support element that will coordinate 
personnel support between components. A JFLogCHQ has a dual role, 
looking forward to provide personnel support to the components and looking 
back to monitor personnel activities from, and in, the strategic base. Using 
a JFLogCHQ to undertake the more practical aspects of operational and 
tactical personnel support will allow the operational headquarters J1 staff to 
concentrate on the critical personnel factors affecting the campaign plan.
UK personnel support in a national contingent headquarters
1.25. Where the UK operates as a partner in a coalition force, a national 
contingent commander or Commander British Forces will be appointed. UK 
components will normally remain within the overall UK command system, 
although the UK national contingent commander may not have tactical 
authority over UK contingents embedded within larger coalition components. 
Administration of UK personnel remains a national responsibility at all times. 
14
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction
The J1 cell may be responsible for operational location actions for deployed personnel

The national contingent commander’s headquarters will normally have a J1 cell 
to oversee UK personnel arrangements. The J1 cell may be responsible for:
• undertaking operational location (OPLOC) actions for deployed UK 
personnel;
• delivering theatre-level J1 services to the deployed force;
• providing direction and policy advice to a UK JFLogCHQ and UK 
personnel embedded in other components; and/or
• liaising with coalition partners at the operational level.
National support element
1.26. The national support element (scaled to size depending on the national 
context) provides the national personnel support focus for the operational 
headquarters within a multinational operation. Given that the majority of 
operations are conducted in a multinational context, a national support 
element is likely to be the enduring successor organisation to the JFLogCHQ 
for the life of an operation.
a. The national support element delivers a coordination and liaison 
function between the UK and other deployed coalition forces. The 
operational commander will require command of appropriate force 
elements to deliver its outputs.
b. National support elements normally consist predominantly of 
individual augmentees and are tailored to operational requirements. It 
is, however, possible to use a formed headquarters as the core of the 
national support element.
Tactical-level command and control
1.27 . Responsibility for all aspects of our deployed personnel’s well-being 
remains with the relevant commanding officer. Support for this role is provided 
by specialists within the unit and the operational command headquarters. 
Levels of external assistance will depend on resources available within units 
and the extent of personnel support requirements. As circumstances change, 
the command chain must be kept informed to ensure appropriate resources 
are made available.
15
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Role of the operational commander
1.28. Operational commanders are responsible for providing personnel 
support to those they command. They must understand personnel support 
arrangements across their area of operations, identify any shortfalls and 
provide solutions to fix them where possible.8 A personal interest in delivering 
personnel support will encourage efficient delivery and provide clear evidence 
of the commander’s interest in their personnel’s welfare.
8 Joint operations area is defined as: a temporary area within a theatre of operations 
defined by the Supreme Allied Commander Europe, in which a designated joint force 
commander plans and executes a specific mission at the operational level. NATOTerm.
16
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

Key points
• Military capability is underpinned by people.
• Equipment, technology, training and doctrine may confer significant 
advantage, but it is the moral component, and the morale of the force in 
particular, that will most often prove decisive.
• A whole force approach will ensure that Defence’s goals are achieved by 
high-performing, fully integrated, well-led teams of capable and skilled 
people drawn from our Regular and Reserve UK Armed Forces, the Civil 
Service and contractors.
• The MOD deploys significant numbers of civilians each year, directly 
supporting our Armed Forces on operations.
• The commander of any deployed force has overall responsibility for the 
conduct and safety of all MOD civilians deployed within their formation.
• The overriding principle should be one of parity: any unjustified difference 
in the treatment of deployed personnel will erode morale.
• Personnel support has close links with other combat service support 
functions, especially moving personnel, medical support and real life 
support.
• Personnel support should be made available as far forward as is 
operationally possible.
• There is no single model for the command and control of personnel and a 
range of models may be employed.
• Operational commanders are responsible for providing personnel support 
to those they command.
• Commanders must understand personnel support arrangements, identify 
any shortfalls and provide solutions to fix them where possible.
17
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
1
Introduction

[Page 28: No extractable text]

Section 1 – Joint Personnel Administration  . . . . . . 21
Section 2 – Operational location . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Section 3 – Optional Protocol II to the United Nations 
                   Convention on the Rights of the Child. . . 25
Section 4 – Discipline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Section 5 – Deployment welfare support and  
                   recreation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Section 6 – Through-life learning and personal  
                   development  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
Chapter 2 outlines the key supporting functions that are 
relevant to personnel support for joint operations.
19
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Chapter 2

…as we look into the future, an 
age in which the dangers are 
changing and growing, we will 
depend on our people more 
than ever. So we must look 
after them, like never before.
 
Penny Mordaunt MP , then Defence Secretary, 
addressing the Land Warfare Conference, 2019 
 
”
“
20
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

Chapter 2
Personnel support activities
Section 1 – Joint Personnel 
Administration
2.1. Joint Personnel Administration (JPA) is the tool for the human resources 
administration of Service personnel. JPA processes include pay and allowances, 
career management, absences, leave, mobilisation and management of 
establishments. In the deployed environment, online JPA is supplemented by  
the offline JPA application. This provides a subset of functionality and locally 
cached data to allow users to continue interrogating and updating records.9
Section 2 – Operational location
2.2. An effective arrivals process is essential for personnel administration and 
to support JPA interfaces. The operational requirement for tracking personnel 10 
deployed on operations is delivered through the JPA Move and Track function 
known as operational location, with policy detailed in Joint Service Publication 
(JSP) 756, Operational Movements and Tracking. Operational location activity:
• enables joint operational headquarters and single Services to track  
the location of individuals on operations; and
• identifies the individual’s unit and, once deployed, their medical  
status, including exposure to significant environmental hazards and 
health risks and the precautions taken, such as vaccinations, to 
mitigate such risks.
9 Offline JPA does not have the same number of processes as the online version. The 
features common to both the online and offline JPA are designed to make them familiar to 
users. There is no self-service functionality in the offline version, nor can work be shared 
between users. The latest versions of the JPA, joint Service publications (JSPs), business 
process guides (BPGs) and the JPA Pocket Guide to Deployed Administration  should be 
consulted before deploying.
10 This comprises all eligible Regular and mobilised Reserve Service personnel, Ministry of 
Defence (MOD) and designated other government department civilians, foreign exchange 
personnel and any contractor support to operations employees.
21
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

2.3. When it is available, commanders can use tracking information held in 
JPA to manage personnel and identify their status.11 Units are responsible for 
recording arrival in theatre and any onward movement. Figure 2.1 shows the 
division of responsibilities in theatre between operational location teams and 
unit administrative staff. This division of responsibilities ensures that: 
• an individual’s location is updated quickly so the personnel report 
will be as accurate as possible;
• action taken by operational location staff will be identical for each 
person arriving; and
• visitor arrivals are recorded by the operational location staff so their 
own human resources staff can adjust allowances on return.
Figure 2.1 – Operational location responsibilities in theatre
11 Due to the nature of some overseas operations, a functioning J1 system may not be in 
place. In such instances, Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) J1 staff will advise.
Theatre arrival point
(For example: airport)
Individual’s usual
location in theatre
Any other
location in theatre
Theatre operational location staff
are responsible for recording these movements
Unit human resources staff
are responsible for recording these movements
Arrive Depart
Arrive Depart
Arrive Depart
22
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

Command and control
2.4. Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) J1 (Personnel) is responsible 
for coordinating JPA operational location within operational teams and 
produces Chief of Joint Operation’s (CJO’s) personnel report. Headquarters 
Standing Joint Command (United Kingdom) (HQ SJC(UK)) is responsible for 
coordinating JPA operational locations for most UK operations and military aid 
to the civil authorities (MACA) activity.
a. The overseas deployed headquarters is responsible to the 
operational headquarters for implementing JPA operational location 
in the joint operations area and for the accuracy of the data in the 
personnel report. Implementation is normally delegated to the Joint 
Force Logistic Component Headquarters or a national support element, 
where one exists.
b. The Joint Force Maritime Component Command is responsible for 
recording the operational location of all personnel in ships entering or 
leaving the joint operations area, including all joiners, leavers and visitors. 
This excludes submarines that do not dock within the joint operations 
area.
c. HQ SJC(UK) is the operational-level headquarters responsible for 
the delivery of most UK operations and MACA tasks. It is responsible 
for implementing operational locations and sets the framework for J1 for 
each task. The tactical implementation of J1 is delegated to the relevant 
joint military commander.
Responsibilities
2.5. The deployed headquarters is responsible for the following operational 
location functions. These may be carried out by Joint Force Support 
Headquarters or a national support element.
• Maintaining the operational location for all in-theatre personnel.
• Tracking of casualties, which is usually recorded through the 
Defence Patient Tracking Cell; casualties (including captured, 
interned or detained persons) are to be tracked as early as possible 
from point of wounding until return to duties or return to UK.
23
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

• Tracking of captured persons following guidance in Joint Doctrine 
Publication (JDP) 1-10, Captured Persons.12 
• Ensuring the correct roles and responsibilities for personnel with 
operational location responsibilities are maintained by instructing and 
training operational location teams in theatre, and providing arrivals 
process assurance.
• Making sure environmental health risks identified by J4 medical 
environmental health staff are recorded in JPA by the J1 operational 
location cell.
2.6. Defence Business Services has a key a role in the provision of JPA on 
operations. They are responsible for providing:
• arrangements for the long-term archiving of all operational location 
information recorded on JPA;
• JPA technical support to operational teams;
• amendments to the JPA Move and Track 24-hour operational 
locations, following notification by the relevant operational 
headquarters; and
• the Prisoners of War Information Bureau.
Application at key stages
2.7. Prepare. The daily preparation of the personnel report and the accuracy 
of operational location data underpins many J1 activities. Therefore operational 
location planning needs to determine which personnel (civilians, deployed 
contractors and others) are to be included and then robust systems must be 
considered for personnel tracking as part of the operations planning process. 
2.8. Project. For overseas operations (and applicable to UK-based operations), 
personnel may arrive into an operational theatre by a variety of means. Timely 
recording of initial arrival allows personnel to disperse from their point of 
disembarkation in good order. In the expeditionary phase of an operation, the 
operational commander must ensure that sufficient J1 support is deployed 
12 See JDP 1-10, Captured Persons, 4th Edition, Chapter 4, Section 5 – The National 
Information Bureau.
24
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

to allow operational location functions to be effective immediately on arrival. 
The in-theatre operational location team will record a change to an individual’s 
24-hour Move and Track location, and record eligibility for allowances.
2.9. Sustain. Maintaining accurate tracking records enables effective 
personnel control within the joint operations area. Commanders should 
be aware that accurate operational location actions will generate detailed 
information on:
• permanent arrivals in theatre;
• visitors to theatre;
• personnel movement within theatre; 
• temporary absence from theatre; and
• permanent departure from theatre.
2.10. Redeploy. Accurate operational location recording for personnel leaving 
theatre is essential to ensure appropriate dismounting and amendments to 
leave and allowance entitlements. On cessation of an operation, the in-theatre 
commander must ensure that they retain the ability to conduct operational 
location actions until all personnel have left the operational theatre.
Medical tracking mechanisms
2.11. Within a medical treatment facility (Role 2 (enhanced) or higher) 13 
casualties will be tracked, as well as using hospital-specific casualty tracking 
capabilities. If a patient is not within a UK treatment facility then the local 
commander must ensure that appropriate operational location action is taken 
on their behalf.
Section 3 – Optional Protocol II to the 
United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Child
2.12. Optional Protocol II to the United Nations Conventions on the Rights of 
the Child has a direct impact on the deployment and employment of Service 
personnel under the age of 18 in theatre. At the signature of the Optional 
13 See Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.10(C), Allied Joint Doctrine for Medical Support 
(with UK national elements) for an explanation of the roles.
25
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

Protocol, the UK entered the following declaration with the United Nations 
Secretariat.
2.13. Members of the UK Armed Forces under the age of 18 are not routinely 
to deploy from the UK on operations. If there is, or it is considered likely that 
there will be, an escalation in tension/hostile activity and there is a possibility 
that a unit will take a direct part in or be put at significant risk by hostilities, 
personnel under the age of 18 are to be returned to the UK or moved to a 
temporary place of safety. 
Section 4 – Discipline 
2.14. Disciplinary principles are laid down in the Armed Forces Act 2006 and 
subsequent amendments, as well as the Reserve Forces Act 1996. These 
Acts are supplemented by subordinate legislation, as set out in the Manual of 
Service Law.14 The overarching principle is that the Service discipline system 
should be swift, fair and support operational effectiveness. The key principles 
when applying discipline are as follows:
• commanding officers should be able to exercise their disciplinary 
powers over all personnel under their command;
14 See JSP 830, Manual of Service Law, Version 2.
The United Kingdom will take all feasible measures to ensure 
that members of its Armed Forces who have not attained the 
age of 18 years do not take part in hostilities. However, the UK 
understands that Article 1 of the protocol would not exclude the 
deployment of members of the Armed Forces under the age of 
18 to take a direct part in hostilities where:
• there is a genuine military need to deploy their unit or 
ship to an area in which hostilities are taking place; and
• by reason of the nature and urgency of the situation 
it is not practicable to withdraw such persons before 
deployment; or to do so would undermine the operational 
effectiveness of their ship or unit and thereby put at risk the 
successful completion of the military mission and/or the 
safety of other personnel.
“
26
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

• commanding officers should deal with one single-Service higher 
authority in relation to the handling of disciplinary cases – this higher 
authority will be the lead Service for the subsequent handling of the 
case; and
• irrespective of which disciplinary chain deals with a case, the 
disciplinary effect should be the same.
Disciplinary powers
2.15. Discipline is a full command responsibility and remains so regardless 
of the identity of the operational commander, who must be satisfied that 
arrangements are in place to ensure that discipline is efficiently administered to 
support operational effectiveness. Commanders must note that administrative 
action does not necessarily follow the same chain of command as disciplinary 
action. Whilst minor administrative action is tri-Service,15 major administrative 
action is dealt under the relevant single-Service policy16 and advice must be 
sought from the relevant single-Service command chain.
Joint commander’s/in-theatre commander’s authority
2.16. All Service personnel should have a clearly identified commanding 
officer who is responsible for maintaining good order and discipline on 
operations. On small-scale operations the in-theatre commander may also 
be the commanding officer. On larger operations there will usually be more 
than one commanding officer, sitting below the in-theatre commander. In this 
case the in-theatre commander will usually not be a commanding officer for 
discipline purposes themselves, but may be the higher authority. Discipline 
chains of command should be clearly identified and promulgated in operational 
staff work. Legal support to the commanding officer will ordinarily be provided 
by the single-Service legal branch of the identified higher authority. Where the 
most appropriate chain of disciplinary command is not obvious, this matter 
should be resolved between the relevant operational commander and the 
single Services.
15 See JSP 833, Minor Administrative Action, Version 2.2.
16 Royal Navy – Book of Reference (BR) 3, Volume 1, Naval Personnel Management . 
British Army – Army General and Administrative Instructions (AGAI), Chapter 67, 
Administrative Action. Royal Air Force – Air Publication (AP) 3392, Volume 4.
27
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

Jurisdiction
2.17. A clear understanding of jurisdiction is critical when personnel are 
deployed to a foreign territory. It is usually an integral section within a status of 
forces agreement/memorandum of understanding and will vary from theatre 
to theatre. Jurisdictional provisions determine who has authority to exercise 
discipline or criminal jurisdiction over personnel accused of misconduct 
while deployed. The rules may differ depending upon whether the accused 
is a Service person, civil servant or contractor. The provisions will determine 
whether and when the sending state or host nation have exclusive jurisdiction 
or, in the event of concurrent jurisdiction, primacy of jurisdiction. The provisions 
will determine who can arrest, detain, prosecute and sentence the accused. 
Commanders must understand the jurisdictional rules in theatre. Potential 
problems may arise in countries that criminalise behaviour that is legal in the 
UK, such as homosexuality, close proximity or consuming alcohol. Specialist, 
theatre-specific J1, J9 (Legal, medial and policy) and legal advice should also 
be obtained in relation to jurisdiction on a case-by-case basis.
Section 5 – Deployment welfare 
support and recreation
Policy
2.18. Deployment welfare support policy is the framework within which the 
Ministry of Defence (MOD) provides both its military and civilian personnel with 
the fullest possible support to safeguard their psychological and physiological 
well-being, set against, and consistent with, the deployment environment and 
the availability of resources. A deployment includes operations, exercises and 
other deployments away from the permanent place of duty, including activities 
in the UK and involving entitled personnel.17
Effects
2.19. Service welfare provision is primarily intended to manage the critical 
connection between welfare and operational effectiveness. Deployment 
welfare support is tailored for the specific circumstances of each deployment 
17 JSP 770, Tri-Service Operational and Non-Operational Welfare Policy , Part 1, 
Chapter 6, Paragraph 1.6.01 provides detail of qualification and provision process for the 
deployment welfare package and welfare grant for UK deployments (for example, MACA).
28
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

and is based around an effects-based approach, which seeks to achieve the 
following.
a. Connect. To enable deployed personnel to retain contact with 
family, friends and remain connected to their personal lives, and 
therefore find reintegration easier at the end of a deployment.
b. Entertain. To provide for the leisure and relaxation needs of 
deployed personnel.
c. Sustain. To maintain the wider physiological and psychological 
needs of the deployed personnel (and their families and friends). 
Examples may include: physical training equipment; retail; postal 
courier services; spiritual and pastoral support; home-based activity 
programmes for families and friends; and rest and recuperation periods.
Providing the deployed welfare package
2.20. Planning the deployed welfare package is a J1 responsibility and 
derived through a structured estimate process led by the operational 
commander. Commanders and staff will need to determine the Service need 
that exists at each location, which may change according to the stage of a 
deployment or operation. 
29
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities
British Forces Broadcasting Service provide entertainment events in theatre

Operational stress management
2.21. For most Service personnel, participation in operations is a positive 
experience. However, for some, such experiences are detrimental due to 
exposure to acute traumatic pressure and resultant post-traumatic distress. 
Operational stress management policies reinforce the message that:
• stress reactions are a natural consequence of military operations 
and all individuals, regardless of rank, age or gender are 
susceptible; and
• most stress reactions are entirely normal and manageable, 
particularly with the correct degree of support from superiors and 
peers.
2.22. The MOD’s operational stress management policy, which includes 
the Health and Safety Executive’s six Management Standards approach, 
provides the framework for the single-Service policies on operational stress 
management.18 The policy ensures operational stress management is delivered 
with consistency, as well as raising overall awareness of operations-related 
stress management.19 An important activity is providing mental health and 
well-being briefings as part of the deployment cycle before, during and after 
operations.20 Consideration should also be given to ensuring personnel outside 
of an overseas theatre, or committed to operations at home, but still creating 
operational effect have the same access to stress management. 
2.23. Commanders at all levels must make every effort to limit the potential 
for those under their command to suffer from psychological problems as a 
result of operations. Responsibility for identifying and supporting vulnerable 
individuals rests with the chain of command at every level, from the highest to 
the very lowest. Those most familiar with their personnel may be best placed 
to identify the early signs of stress.
18 Commanders should constantly review individual Service’s advice on stress 
management on operations.
19 Operational stress is part of the continuum of occupational stress for which further 
guidance is contained in JSP 375, Management of Health and Safety in Defence .
20 JSP 950, Part 1, Leaflet 2-7-1, Mental Health and Wellbeing Briefing Before, During and 
After Deployment.
30
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

Leisure and recreation
2.24. Some degree of off-duty relaxation will be possible in all except the 
most intense operations. Commanders should consider the following factors.
a. Space for individuals to be able to relax supports their overall 
well-being. Expeditionary campaign infrastructure should be scaled to 
provide sufficient space for welfare purposes.
b. Leisure facilities for major operations are provided and staffed by 
the Expeditionary Forces Institute wherever possible, thus removing the 
need for ad hoc unit facilities. However, commanders retain the right 
to authorise units to make their own provision, particularly in the early 
stages of an operation. Decisions regarding the licensing and control 
of unit bars rests with commanding officers. Separate officers’, senior 
non-commissioned officers’ and non-commissioned officers’ mess 
facilities should be established where possible.
c. Physical recreation enables personnel to maintain their physical 
fitness and provides a means for de-stressing. Group activities build 
team spirit and contribute to unit cohesiveness and thus operational 
effectiveness. To enable physical recreation, deploying operational 
fitness equipment and unit sports equipment should be considered. 
Security considerations permitting, much can be gained through 
sporting activity with local teams.
Space for individuals to be able to relax supports their overall well-being
31
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

Section 6 – Through-life learning and 
personal development
2.25. Access to education and personal development on operations helps 
prevent career repercussions for Service personnel and contributes to the 
moral component of fighting power. More enduring overseas operations are 
supported by theatre education centres, which, dependent on the whole force 
footprint, are set up as soon as possible in consultation with PJHQ and staffed 
by Educational and Training Services officers.
2.26. The purpose of the theatre education centres is to deliver, or facilitate, a 
wide range of educational and operational support activities. These operational 
support activities might include providing cultural awareness or language 
training, teaching English to local nationals or enhancing the instructional 
capability of both UK and local security forces. As well as providing access 
to mandatory education, the theatre education centres may also offer funding 
advice, support and resources to assist personnel with their personal and 
professional development activities. 
32
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities
More enduring overseas operations are supported by theatre education centres

Key points
• JPA is the tool for the human resources administration of Service 
personnel.
• Personnel tracking informs operational commanders of the forces 
involved in an operation.
• The single Services are responsible for ensuring that the personal details 
of all personnel due to deploy to or visit operational areas are up to date 
on JPA.
• Casualties (including captured, interned or detained persons) are to be 
tracked from as early as possible from point of wounding until return to 
duties or return to the UK.
• JDP 1-10, Captured Persons is the UK doctrine covering all matters 
relating to captured persons.
• Members of the UK Armed Forces under the age of 18 should not 
routinely deploy on overseas operations.
• The MOD is committed to providing the fullest possible level of welfare 
support to Service personnel on operations to maintain morale.
• The MOD’s operational stress management policy provides the 
framework for the single-Service policies on operational stress 
management.
• Disciplinary arrangements must be agreed prior to deployment and made 
clear in every mission directive.
• Some degree of off-duty relaxation should be facilitated wherever possible.
• Access to education and personal development on more enduring 
overseas operations helps prevent career repercussions and contributes 
to the moral component of fighting power.
33
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
2
Personnel support activities

[Page 44: No extractable text]

Section 1 – Force generation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Section 2 – Planning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Section 3 – Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Section 4 – Reception   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Annex 3A – Planning considerations. . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter 3 outlines the key factors that commanders and 
staff must take into account when preparing, planning and 
projecting personnel support for joint operations.
35
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Chapter 3

The ‘front’ no longer lies 
in some distant theatre of 
operations, but is within the 
port, airfield or barrack. 
 
Integrated Operating Concept, 
August 2021 
”
“
36
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Chapter 3
Preparing, planning and 
projecting
Section 1 – Force generation
Operational planning cycle
3.1. The operational planning cycle combines the requirements, activities and 
resources necessary to generate, sustain and recover a force. Personnel are 
a fundamental part of this process. For more information on the operational 
planning cycle, see Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the 
Planning of Operations (with UK national elements).
Force generation
3.2. With the Ministry of Defence (MOD) moving to a more forward and 
engaged posture it brings a greater complexity to force generation activity. 
Force generation of military elements is the responsibility of the military 
commands21 and involves the preparation, testing and, on orders, activation 
of forces. Force elements and individuals should be resourced, trained, 
maintained and equipped to theatre entry standard and should be capable of 
integrating with any joint force.22 They are held at readiness states mandated 
by the departmental plan, through Service plans, reducing readiness as 
necessary in order to deploy. 
Ministry of Defence departmental plan
3.3. The MOD departmental plan sets the requirement for Defence outputs 
that align with the national security objectives. Top level budget holders 
are responsible for maintaining elements at the appropriate readiness to 
meet these requirements. Training and maintenance activity, together with 
associated logistic support and sustainability requirements, is programmed 
21 Front line commands and Strategic Command.
22 Theatre entry standards are set by Chief of Joint Operations (CJO) for overseas 
operations and each theatre will have specific competency levels that must be attained. 
Deployment standards for UK operations will be agreed through the military aid to the civil 
authorities staffing process.
37
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

against this readiness requirement. Front line commands (FLCs) deliver force 
elements as specified in Service delivery agreements. These outputs are 
derived from statements of requirement that include individual and collective 
training, equipment sustainability, interoperability and readiness. Together 
these outputs produce force elements at the required readiness that can be 
allocated to mission groups to meet operational requirements overseas and as 
part of UK resilience.23
Force preparation
3.4. Military commands achieve the required levels of readiness in a variety of 
ways, depending on the requirement and the particular needs of their operating 
environment. Each military command has to achieve a balance between:
• holding force elements (including casualty replacements) at high 
readiness for extended periods;
• providing forces for enduring deployed commitments; and
• maintaining acceptable harmony levels.
Military command responsibilities
3.5. Tension may exist between the requirement to generate forces for 
enduring operations and the need to be prepared to deploy forces to 
meet a contingency requirement. Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ), 
Headquarters Standing Joint Command (United Kingdom) (HQ SJC(UK)) and 
FLCs will cooperate to ensure staffing levels are optimised, especially where 
the generation of augmentees is concerned. To achieve the required force 
elements at readiness, FLCs must:
• maintain standing UK military tasks;
• bring units to full establishment levels to deploy as part of joint 
operations;
• provide individuals to support joint operations;
23 UK resilience is defined by the Cabinet Office as: the ability of the community, services, 
area or infrastructure to detect, prevent and, if necessary, to withstand, handle and recover 
from disruptive challenges.  Described further in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 02, UK 
Operations: the Defence Contribution to Resilience , 4th Edition.
38
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

• sustain enduring operations from the UK;
• provide force elements for contingency tasks; and
• train force elements and augmentees in preparation for enduring and 
contingency operations.
Permanent Joint Headquarters responsibilities
3.6. It is PJHQ’s responsibility to ensure that staff requirements in theatre are 
reviewed regularly to achieve efficient use of personnel. PJHQ also ensure that 
sustained personnel support is factored into its campaign planning.
Augmentation
3.7. Augmentation provides additional numbers of personnel to bring units 
and formations to full strength, or activate specific individuals, as part of the 
force generation process for operations. Individuals are selected, trained 
and deployed to meet directed operational personnel requirements over and 
above peacetime requirements. It may include the re-distribution of individuals 
brought together to form a temporary unit/sub-unit or forming/reinforcing 
Regular units with Reserves. It excludes the planned or unplanned deployment 
or redeployment of a formed unit/sub-unit, or the planned formation of a 
composite unit/sub-unit of individuals for their crisis role. 
Augmentation management
3.8. Augmentation must be managed to ensure that the gapping of peacetime 
posts, and subsequent overstretch, are minimised. Assistant Chief of the 
Defence Staff (ACDS) (Operations and Commitments) is the senior responsible 
officer for Defence augmentation, which is managed on a daily basis by the 
Defence Single Tasking Authority Individual Augmentation Cell (DSTA IA).
3.9. DSTA IA scrutinises all augmentation requests and coordinates the 
provision of augmentees. Once the requirement has been endorsed, it 
manages the allocation of personnel and provides advice to the Commitments 
Directorate concerning provision of augmentees in theatre. The DSTA IA and 
two associated steering groups provide higher-level management.
a. The Augmentation Scrutiny Committee is chaired by ACDS 
(Operations and Commitments) with OF-6 representation from the 
39
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

FLCs, and meets to address operational requirements for Defence 
augmentation. It establishes Defence augmentation requirements, sets 
priorities and arbitrates in the event of disagreements.
b. The Defence Augmentation Steering Group is chaired by the Head 
of Commitments and draws together the stakeholders involved in 
long-term augmentation delivery. It meets twice-yearly (or as required) 
to identify and resolve longer-term issues.
Policing augmentation demand
3.10. Where an augmentation requirement creates a significant impact on an 
FLC’s ability to deliver its responsibilities, the FLCs are required to define the 
impact to the Security Policy and Operations (SPO) Directorate in the MOD. 
The SPO Directorate is responsible for deciding relative priority and who will 
own the consequent risk.
Risk
3.11. Each augmentation post carries a cost and creates risk for the losing 
unit. The level of risk is variable and may not be visible to PJHQ, HQ SJC(UK) 
or the MOD Head Office. Therefore, an augmentation requirement that lasts 
for longer than 24 months should be established as an addition to the human 
resourcing margin of the relevant Service.
40
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting
Regular and Reserve medical staff working together on exercise

Types of augmentation
3.12. Military augmentation is divided into above-the-line and below-the-line 
augmentation: the ‘line’ is the funded personnel line. For augmentation 
purposes, it is assumed that each contribution is filled.
a. Above-the-line augmentation is the process of filling 
MOD-authorised or deployed operational individual personnel 
requirements, both military and civilian, above funded levels when the 
post, or posts, cannot be filled from FLC resources. Above-the-line 
military augmentation is managed by the DSTA IA; UK civilian 
augmentation or temporary overseas service is managed by Director 
General Civilian Personnel Central Human Resources (Augmentation) 
and PJHQ Head of Joint Operations (Human Resources). Headquarters 
Defence Medical Services manages medical personnel above-the-line 
augmentation requirements.
b. Below-the-line augmentation is the process of filling individual 
staffing requirements for specific operations and is conducted 
without reference to DSTA IA. It is managed locally and is part of 
force generation. In the first instance, FLCs must seek to meet any 
augmentation requirement from within their own staff resources as part 
of the below-the-line process.
Planned and unplanned augmentation
3.13. Military and civilian above-the-line augmentation is categorised as either 
planned or unplanned. These are defined as follows.
a. Planned augmentation is the process by which an organisation 
or headquarters creates additional crisis-only posts within its 
establishment, which are scrutinised and approved in advance. They 
are documented and managed using augmentation staffing lists and 
are filled either by dual appointing individuals into the crisis role, or by 
identifying posts or augmentee pools, to fill the planned augmentee post 
when activated.
b. Unplanned augmentation is the process by which a demanding 
organisation or headquarters seeks an augmentee to meet unforeseen 
requirements. Unplanned augmentation, also called ad hoc 
augmentation, is subject to scrutiny and approval by the relevant PJHQ 
41
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

operations team and the DSTA IA. Unplanned augmentation posts are 
not on establishments or augmentation lists.
Augmentation principles
3.14. Above-the-line augmentation, planned or unplanned, should only be 
used when essential; it should not be used when staff requirements can be 
met through conventional means. Above-the-line augmentation should not 
be used to fill ‘gaps’ caused by under-staffing, nor to fill a post vacated as a 
result of augmentation (a process known as substitution or backfilling) or for 
replacing casualties. Planned above-the-line augmentation is the preferred 
method.
3.15. Unplanned augmentation is acceptable where the need for an 
augmentation post could not reasonably have been predicted or where there is 
no peacetime establishment against which the required crisis-only post can be 
raised. An augmentee should be used in the post for which the individual has 
been activated. The only exception is when a post cannot be filled either within 
the time frame required or from other theatres. In such circumstances, theatre 
commanders and their staff may, by exception, use the available personnel 
to best operational effect. This must be done in consultation with the DSTA 
IA and any changes in employment should be reported, through PJHQ J1 
(Personnel) and the DSTA IA, to the FLC that has provided the augmentee. 
When the specified task has been completed, an augmentee is to be released 
back to their parent unit and not retained for any other task.
Operational augmentee posts
3.16. The operational commitment of an individual augmentee is nominally 
six months. Supplying FLCs may wish to manage individual tour lengths 
to suit their requirements and changes may be progressed through the 
single-Service’s personnel management organisations. Where there is a need 
to deploy for longer, this will be managed on a case-by-case basis.
3.17. If an augmentation post is, or is likely to be, required beyond six months 
(or if after the initial deployment there is a continuing requirement for the post) 
it should be entered into the PJHQ operational establishment table, which is 
endorsed by the SPO Directorate. However, a permanent increase in Service 
staffing liabilities would need to be approved by central resource and plans 
staffs. 
42
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Using Reserves for augmentation
3.18. Reservists may, subject to ministerial approval, be mobilised for 
operational augmentation. The Defence intent is that only willing Reservists 
are mobilised for enduring operations, except where operational imperatives 
demand otherwise; for example, where individuals have specialist capabilities 
that are in short supply in the Regulars. At other times, particularly at larger 
scale or where concurrency norms are exceeded, Reservists may be mobilised 
against their will. 
3.19. Reservists mobilised for an operation may provide either direct 
operational output in theatre or may be deployed elsewhere to backfill Regular 
Service personnel who have deployed to theatre as individual augmentees. 
Additionally, Reservists on Full Time Reserve Service commitments can 
be used to fill short-term requirements. Service personnel management 
organisations are responsible for identifying suitable Reserves, within the 
readiness criteria, to meet the requirement.
3.20. Reservists may also be used on a voluntary basis for non-operational 
augmentation, for example, for exercises and training. Where the training value 
of augmentation will meet an element of the annual training requirement of the 
Reservist, it can be counted and funded, with the agreement of the Reserve 
unit, as part of the Reservist’s obligatory training carried out under the terms 
of the Reserve Forces Act 1996, Section 22. The remaining activity should be 
conducted under Section 27 (voluntary training and other duties) and funded 
as appropriate.
Reservist time restrictions
3.21. The time a Reservist may be mobilised is governed by the terms 
of the section of Reserve Forces Act 1996 under which the Reservist was 
mobilised, as stated in the call-out order. Where operational requirements 
dictate a need to retain the Reservist in theatre, staff will need to ensure that 
any extension added onto the period of mobilisation does not exceed the 
individual’s permitted period. This calculation will need to take into account the 
period of mobilised time already served, the additional time required in theatre, 
appropriate post-operational leave and the time for formal demobilisation 
procedures.
43
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Section 2 – Planning
J1 input to the planning process
3.22. J1 staff in the operational headquarters must engage in the planning 
process to ensure that personnel administration requirements are incorporated 
in the operation plan. This will ensure that force elements are able to operate 
efficiently.
Operations planning process
3.23. The operational commander produces a military-strategic estimate, 
in consultation with the Current Commitments Team in the MOD Head Office 
and the military commands. The estimate identifies the capabilities required 
from the Directorate Special Forces and military commands. All staff branches, 
including J1, are represented on the contingency planning team. In parallel, 
the logistic planning team produces a logistic estimate, which also should 
incorporate personnel input.
J1 responsibilities
3.24. During the estimate and planning process, J1 staff will normally develop 
a personnel support element to the estimate and a personnel support annex 
J1 staff in the operational headquarters must engage in the planning process
44
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

to the campaign plan. A comprehensive checklist of planning considerations is 
at Annex 3A. The operation plan should make provision for:
• sufficient J1 equipment and personnel to administer the deployed 
force, including casualty and compassionate services, and 
operational stress management;
• J1 preparation of the force, including appropriate pre-deployment 
training;
• operational welfare services; and
• cashier services.
Single-Service responsibilities
3.25. The FLCs have primary responsibility for providing personnel to support 
joint operations. This includes responsibility for mobilising Reserves. Principal 
personnel officers’ staffs develop single-Service plans, policy and guidance to 
administer personnel support. FLCs are also responsible for:
• providing welfare support to personnel held at readiness;
• reception and administration of personnel returning from operational 
theatres;
• additional support to decompression activities;
• conducting and the administration of post operational stress 
management; and
• providing welfare support to the families of deployed personnel.
J1 planning activity
3.26. The personnel support element is part of the commander’s estimate. 
Personnel support considerations are based on the directives issued by 
the Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS), the Chief of Joint Operations (CJO), 
the joint task force commander (JTFC) and Standing Joint Commander 
(United Kingdom) (SJC(UK)), as well as any relevant reconnaissance reports 
and sources of information such as the media, Internet and Foreign, 
45
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) reports. J1 planning staff will 
need to address the following.
a. Personnel staff requirements. In coordination with J5 (Plans) and 
staff at the relevant FLC, J1 planning will need to determine personnel 
requirements for the joint force and the headquarters, including the 
requirement for J1 staff.
b. Personnel accounting and tracking. Accounting includes 
provision for all Service personnel, civil servants, contractor support 
to operations, other civilians for whom MOD has responsibility, foreign 
exchange personnel and prisoners of war, internees and detainees. 
Casualty and compassionate reporting, mortuary management, 
repatriating the dead and war graves registration should also be 
considered. All activities associated with the operational location of 
personnel are J1 staff responsibilities throughout an operation, from 
deployment to redeployment.
c. Sustaining personnel. Sustaining personnel is an important 
element of the estimate as many of the welfare enablers have 
significant logistic implications. Moreover, the lead times for providing 
some facilities and equipment can have a significant influence on how 
personnel sustainment is delivered.
Prisoner handling
3.27 . Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 1-10, Captured Persons details the 
responsibilities of the overseas operational commander and the J1–J9 staff 
within the joint task force headquarters (JTFHQ) concerning appropriate 
arrangements for prisoner handling. The J1 staff has the responsibility for the 
overall management of prisoner handling.
Campaign plan personnel support annex
3.28. The campaign plan will incorporate an annex that will identify command 
responsibilities and functional arrangements for providing personnel support. 
Personnel support guidance contained in the annex is derived from the 
estimate process and concurrent planning activity.
46
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Personnel support staff planning
3.29. Requirements for additional staff for headquarters, prisoner handling 
or media operations can fluctuate and be intensive to resource. Contingency 
planning is essential as concurrent operations, or the likelihood of concurrent 
operations, may both constrain the personnel available for the operation and 
demand specific contingency planning with regard to skills that are vital or in 
short supply.
3.30. FLCs are responsible for providing the personnel for operations. 
The directives issued by CDS, the SPO Directorate, CJO and SJC(UK) on 
a case-by-case basis will identify the units and/or capabilities that may be 
assigned to a joint force. These directives may also specify a personnel 
ceiling for the operation. While mitigation may be found through a whole 
force approach, this threshold may become a significant constraint on the 
operational commander’s chosen course of action. The planning process 
should identify the full personnel requirement and initiate sustainment activities 
as well as planned roulement or mobilising of Reserves.
Individual sustainment planning
3.31. Planning for personnel sustainment, including food, water and 
accommodation, is a J4 (Logistics) responsibility. However, increasing 
emphasis has been given to sustaining individuals physically, mentally and 
spiritually using deployment welfare support together with guidance on 
managing stress and alcohol consumption. Planning the deployment welfare 
support package and issuing stress and alcohol management policies are J1 
responsibilities.
 Expectation management of deployed support
3.32. Demand for welfare support may be generated by an expectation that 
facilities and services will be available. By synchronising welfare plans with 
operational activity and the briefings given to commanders and personnel, 
the level of expectation can be managed. Good leadership at the tactical level 
and sound judgement by appointed welfare coordinators should combine 
to highlight the welfare needs during planning and, subsequently, during 
operations. All personnel in theatre must be made aware of the risks involved 
in delivering the welfare elements and the need to balance those risks with the 
needs of personnel. Limiting the deployment support package, especially in 
47
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

austere conditions, may be a consequence of ensuring the delivery of essential 
warfighting supplies.
Deployment welfare support planning
3.33. Regulatory and affordability issues have to be considered for each 
operation and experience has shown that operations differ in their welfare 
requirement. Joint Service Publication (JSP) 770, Tri-Service Operational and 
Non-Operational Welfare Policy should be used by planning staff to design an 
appropriate and affordable effects-based deployed welfare support package. 
Identifying timelines and realising the provision of many aspects of deployment 
welfare support is normally a PJHQ, national support element/Joint Force 
Logistics Component Headquarters responsibility for overseas operations 
or HQ SJC(UK) in conjunction with the relevant joint military commander for 
most UK operations and military aid to the civil authorities activity. It is useful 
to apply the logistic planning considerations of destination, demand, distance 
and duration. It must be understood that operational priorities may delay 
the planned support being implemented. Paradoxically, the more taxing the 
deployment (when deployment welfare support would be of most benefit), the 
more difficult it may be to deliver.
Welfare support phases
3.34. For the purposes of planning welfare support provision on an 
overseas operation, it is best divided into six phases. Although the phases 
are discrete, there should be a seamless transition between them from the 
welfare perspective. These phases are shown in Figure 3.1, although it must 
be emphasised that the phases serve as a planning guide and should not be 
rigidly imposed.
If you want the cooperation of humans around you, you must 
make them feel they are important.
Nelson Mandela
“
48
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Figure 3.1 – Welfare support phases on an overseas operation
Stress and alcohol management policies
3.35. The campaign plan must contain a stress management policy that 
identifies the resources required for implementation. Wherever possible, 
a trauma risk management (TRiM) capability should be embedded at unit 
level and an alcohol management policy should be established. 24 Working 
in coalition with forces that do not tolerate the consumption of alcohol will 
heavily influence the latter, but the driving consideration should be operational 
effectiveness, discipline and morale.
24 TRiM is primarily a joint administrative (personnel) initiative, supported by specialist 
medical agencies (such as the Defence Mental Health Services) for managing the 
non-physical impact of a traumatic incident on personnel. Details are currently in JSP 375, 
but detailed policy will transfer to JSP 661, Health & Wellbeing  policy once published.
P la n n e d  i m p r o v e m e nt
Planning and
preparation
phase
Deployment
phase and
build-up phase
Redeployment
phase
Sustained
and roulement
phase
Initial
phase
Follow-on
phase
APOD airport of disembarkation
JOA  joint operations area
SPOD seaport of disembarkation
Information
and brieﬁng
(including
to families)
Deployment
to APOD
and/or SPOD
Basic welfare
needs (+)
Basic welfare
needs
Enhanced
welfare needs
Full welfare
needs
Post
operational
leave
Post
operational
stress
management
Return
welfare
equipment
to store
Decompression
4 months plus
in JOA
Tour end
JOA entry
and ﬁrst
month (–)
1–4 months
in JOA
Levels of operational welfare provision
Time / welfare support phase
49
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

50
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting
Mental health and traumatic risk management
Mental health support and TRiM have evolved as an integral component of 
personnel training, welfare and mitigation whilst on operations or engaged in 
any activity where an individual, or individuals, have had to deal with a highly 
traumatic incident. In Operation Banner, 1969–2007 , British military personnel 
deployed to Northern Ireland, a complex sociocultural, religious and political based 
domestic sectarian conflict with a rapidly deteriorating security situation. Initially 
there was little training, preparation or understanding of the complexities of the 
situation. As the pressures and levels of violence increased after Bloody Sunday 
in January 1972, military casualties rapidly increased and the aftermath of terrorist 
attacks exposed uniformed personnel to not just military casualties, but also to 
mass casualty events. UK Armed Forces personnel were in many cases the first 
responders on the scene, helping to evacuate and provide security and triage first 
aid to civilian casualties, all whilst under threat from secondary devices. 
Unlike many post-war military operations around the world, Operation Banner 
posed greater pressures; it was truly a high threat civil conflict. As a result there 
was an increased incidence of mental health crisis in military personnel, high levels 
of absence without leave, negative effects on morale, alcohol abuse, self-harming, 
disciplinary and crime incidents, prescribed medication dependency and complex 
personal and social issues. Understanding and mitigating the severe psychological 
effects of high intensity deployments had to evolve. There was little comprehension 
or capability for pre-deployment preparation, TRiM, high risk profiling, post-incident 
counselling/interview, monitoring or referral services. Subsequently there was an 
expansion of, and investment in, mental health services, supporting infrastructure 
and a referral system; it was the first stage in an eventual transformation in mental 
health awareness and what is now termed TRiM. The new process is essential in 
helping personnel function effectively and continue to operate after highly traumatic 
events or the cumulative effects of such events. It has now been proven that early 
counselling, intervention and risk identification post incident from embedded TRiM 
trained personnel at unit level is very effective. Additionally, the more recent concept 
of a workplace mental health first aider for the whole force is another innovation that 
underpins the principles of continuous counselling support. The lessons learned 
in Northern Ireland, through the Falklands campaign, the Gulf War, post-Cold War 
period, demanding operations in the former Republic of Yugoslavia, in Bosnia and 
Kosovo, Sierra Leone, Operation Telic in Iraq and Operation Herrick in Afghanistan 
have enabled the provision of mental health services to evolve. Integrating awareness 
and monitoring the mental health of personnel preparing for deployment, during 
operations and after operations is critical to maintaining operational effectiveness. 

Section 3 – Deployment
3.36. The process of deployment relocates forces from one location to 
another area of assigned operation (both overseas and at home). In overseas 
operations, distinction is made between strategic movement into a joint 
operations area and deployment within the joint operations area (reception, 
staging, onward movement and integration). AJP-3.13, Allied Joint Doctrine 
for the Deployment and Redeployment of Forces covers the conduct of these 
phases of an operation in greater detail.
3.37. Whilst for most land- and air-based elements deployments will be either 
as individuals or formed units via strategic lift, in the maritime environment 
most personnel will deploy on board the warship. However, it is likely that 
some personnel will be required to deploy individually, for example, to augment 
an already deployed ship’s company, to provide contracted engineering 
support or to provide shore-based support; hence, the following sections also 
remain pertinent to the maritime environment.
Mounting definition
3.38. Mounting is defined by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
as: all preparations made in areas designated for the purpose, in anticipation 
of an operation. It includes the assembly in the mounting area, preparation, 
and maintenance within the mounting area, movement to loading points, and 
subsequent embarkation into either ships, craft, or aircraft if applicable. 25 In the 
UK, mounting refers to the practical coordination of tasks as dictated by the 
detailed deployment plan.26
Mounting command and control
3.39. A controlling headquarters will be nominated for all deployed joint 
operations and major joint exercises.27 The controlling headquarters is 
responsible for directing the activities of military commands and Defence 
Equipment and Support (DE&S) in the mounting of a joint force and for 
coordinating the deployment of that force, but does not generate the force. 
Mounting is a J3 (Operations)-led process directed by J3 operational teams. 
25 NATOTerm. Most commonly in the UK this is via the Joint Air Mounting Centre at South 
Cerney or the Sea Mounting Centre at Marchwood Military Port.
26 This is covered in detail in JDP 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations .
27 The controlling headquarters may be PJHQ, HQ SJC(UK) or a single-Service 
component headquarters.
51
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Functional responsibility for mounting lies with the J1/J4 lead in the controlling 
headquarters and is exercised by their staff. The detailed deployment plan 
encompasses all orders and directions that allocate strategic lift assets and 
details the embarkation of personnel and cargoes.
Permanent Joint Headquarters deployment cell
3.40. At the start of planning for an overseas operation, a deployment cell 
may be created with the J4 joint mounting cell at its core. The joint mounting 
cell:
• provides a standing contingency planning team/operational team 
focus, which directs and coordinates the planning for the initial 
deployment, sustainment and redeployment activities for that 
operation;
• provides the deployment focus for an operation, but does not 
manage the mounting activities for enduring operations;
• provides the focus for deployment cell activity using J4 movement 
and Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements subject 
matter expertise as required; and
• works initially to the direction of the J5 contingency planning team 
then, as the operation matures, works under the authority of the 
relevant J3 operational team.
Joint force element table
3.41. Once the military-strategic estimate is concluded, PJHQ will issue the 
joint statement of requirement to the FLCs and DE&S. It covers the following 
information.
a. The joint force element table details those tasked to provide force 
elements to the operation and enables the drafting of single-Service or 
organisational force element tables. The J4 joint mounting cell acts as 
the focus for force element table submissions from FLCs/JTFHQ/Joint 
Force Logistics Component Headquarters and DE&S, and coordinates 
submissions in an iterative round of staffing for accuracy and 
completeness. The product is consolidated into a joint force element 
52
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

table for submission to J3 for ratification against the joint statement of 
requirement.
b. The joint force element table is comprehensive and details force 
elements in ‘capability groupings’, but is not as detailed as FLC staff 
tables. Once endorsed by J3, the final joint force element table is issued 
under J3 authority and becomes the authoritative document governing 
the shape and size of the deploying force. As well as informing the JTFC 
of the capabilities, equipment and availability of initial operating stocks, 
capability gaps are highlighted so they can be addressed under J3 
direction.
Joint desired order of arrival
3.42. The order of arrival of force elements into a theatre must match the 
commander’s intent to create effect. The PJHQ operational team and JTFHQ 
staff work concurrently to develop a joint desired order of arrival from the joint 
force element table, which supports the operation plan. The joint desired order 
of arrival determines the sequence and loading patterns of force elements 
on departure; its production is an iterative process involving JTFHQ, Defence 
Support Chain Operations and Movements, and PJHQ. The joint desired 
order of arrival enables early bids for strategic movement assets to be made. It 
includes prioritised force elements for loading, movement and delivery dates, 
thereby allowing the joint force to be mounted and deployed in a manner 
consistent with the operation plan. Maritime elements requiring deployment 
not already embarked in warships must be included in the joint force element 
table and joint desired order of arrival.
Detailed deployment plan
3.43. Once the detailed deployment plan has been produced by PJHQ J3, 
with J1/J4 input, the dominant factor in the process is the physical movement 
of personnel and equipment. Producing a detailed deployment plan denotes 
the point in the mounting process where there is a change in emphasis from 
deployment planning to deployment execution. This change in emphasis is 
important for both internal and external stakeholders because it is reflected 
by transfers of responsibility in most of the key organisations involved in the 
mounting process.
53
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Personnel and equipment
3.44.  Personnel issues and medical preparation are key components of 
the deployment process. The joint movement order and other deployment 
instructions, taking into account statutory and political requirements, are used 
to coordinate the preparation and mounting of personnel and equipment. The 
administrative preparation of personnel includes issuing specialist clothing, 
fitness screening and dispensing inoculations and prophylactic drugs if 
deploying overseas.28
Training
3.45. Pre-deployment training within the strategic base and in theatre may 
be mandatory for all personnel deploying to a joint operations area; additional 
training may be required by PJHQ or the force generation command in line with 
any appropriate theatre entry standards. Detailed training requirements will be 
articulated in the joint commander’s operational directive for each operation, 
but FLCs remain responsible for the programming and direction of individual, 
collective and specialist training. The timing and content of training serials 
should be considered early in the planning process so that it may be factored 
into the JTFC’s overall priorities for mounting a force.
28 Vaccines and prophylactic drugs may take time to become effective. This must be 
taken into consideration when planning dates for deployment. 
54
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting
Pre-deployment training plays an important role in operational preparation

Section 4 – Reception 
Responsibilities
3.46. Approval for reducing the notice to move for the deploying force 
elements is the responsibility of the MOD. Once received, PJHQ will 
issue additional coordinating instructions in accordance with the detailed 
deployment plan. The J4 joint mounting cell monitors and adjusts, as required, 
the force deployment through a series of force elements and load allocation 
tables on behalf of the J3 operational team. The joint force element table/joint 
desired order of arrival is effectively the first set of call-forward coordinating 
instructions used by the FLCs and other operational mounting process 
stakeholders (for example, Defence Support Chain Operations and Movements 
create a load allocation table from the latest joint force element table/joint 
desired order of arrival). Overall responsibility for delivering the reception, 
staging, onward movement and integration process is held by J4, as detailed 
in JDP 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations and further amplified in AJP-3.13, 
Allied Joint Doctrine for Deployment and Redeployment of Forces .
Reception activities
3.47. Reception is the process of receiving, offloading, marshalling, recording 
and transporting personnel and materiel from strategic or operational lift 
through sea, air or rail points of disembarkation. Reception enables time for 
personnel administration and briefings, as well as their subsequent transport 
away from the points of disembarkation. When required, reception also 
enables personnel to become acclimatised to theatre conditions. This is an 
essential physiological aspect of final preparations for personnel conducting 
operations and the impact of this process must be factored into the personnel 
plan for deployment. For the maritime environment, this process will generally 
take place on board as the ship transits to theatre, however, there may still be 
a requirement for further acclimatisation and integration on arrival in theatre, 
especially for any personnel required to go ashore. 
55
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Key points
• FLCs achieve the required levels of readiness in a variety of ways, 
depending on the requirement and the particular needs of their operating 
environment.
• PJHQ and FLCs will cooperate to ensure personnel levels are optimised, 
especially where the generation of augmentees is concerned.
• Reservists may, subject to ministerial approval, be mobilised for 
operational augmentation.
• During the estimate and planning process, J1 staff will normally develop a 
personnel support element. 
• The campaign plan will incorporate an annex that will identify command 
responsibilities and functional arrangements for providing personnel 
support.
• All personnel in overseas theatres must be aware of the risks involved in 
delivering the welfare elements balanced against the mission.
• Pre-deployment training within the strategic base and in theatre may be 
mandatory for all personnel deploying to a joint operations area.
• FLCs remain responsible for the programming and direction of individual, 
collective and specialist training.
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3
Preparing, planning and projecting

Annex 3A
Planning considerations
3A.1. Prior to an operation, preparatory work mainly involves issuing 
directives that incorporate the J1 requirement for the operation. J1 should 
input into all relevant documentation including:
• CDS’ Directive;
• CJO’s Directive;
• JTFC’s Directive;
• fragmentary orders, as required;
• force instruction documents; and
• mounting order/instruction.
3A.2. Where possible, prior to publishing the directives, J1 should be 
represented on the reconnaissance party. The level of J1 support to each 
operational deployment will depend on the number of personnel deployed and 
which personnel PJHQ has responsibility for. To obtain maximum benefit from 
a reconnaissance, the J1 representative should establish before departing:
• the mission/role of the deploying force;
• formations/units likely to deploy and locations;
• airports of disembarkation/seaports of disembarkation;
• direction or task of the joint force;
• in-theatre air transport/military transport;
• numbers deploying and rate of deployment;
• the whole force blend and differing terms and conditions of service 
(that can impact on availability and benefits pre-, during and 
post-deployment);
• communications requirements;
• likely coalition nations involved;
• worst case number of casualties, refugees/internally displaced 
personnel and captured persons;
• language constraints; and
• entitlement to the deployment welfare package.
57
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3A
Preparing, planning and projecting

Infrastructure
3A.3. For overseas operations the extent and quality of the local 
infrastructure will affect the level of host-nation support available in theatre. 
The J1 reconnaissance representative, in conjunction with the J4 and J6 
(Communication and information systems) representatives, should determine 
the general standard of the local infrastructure and determine whether the 
theatre is bare, austere or well-found.
Command and control
3A.4. Depending on the location, there may already be a J1 headquarters’ 
node in theatre that would provide headquarters’ J1 support and advice. If 
there is not already a J1 presence in the area, then consideration should be 
given to whether they report directly to PJHQ. Additionally, J1 staff should 
consider disciplinary chains of command when reviewing command and 
control arrangements.
58
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3A
Preparing, planning and projecting
Planning should include the need to ship key materiel to operations

Personnel accounting
3A.5. Accurate reporting of personnel movements into, out of and within 
theatre is core J1 business. Many theatres have personnel number caps 
based on political decisions that attract high-level scrutiny. The system to be 
used for recording and tracking personnel movements will be specified in the 
operational mounting instruction. J1 staff should consider:
• access to Joint Personnel Administration;
• where is the most effective location to administer operational 
location requirements for personnel; and
• who will administer operational location data.
Personnel provision
3A.6. While the wider issue of personnel provision will be dealt with by 
individual divisions, and ultimately by J3, J1 staff should consider the J1 liability 
numbers required to support all phases of the operation. While predominantly 
a J7 (Doctrine and training) responsibility, J1 may be required to review the 
reception, staging, onward movement and integration requirement and 
consider surge facilities. The following factors should also be considered by J1 
staff:
• possible locations of theatre reception and departure centres, both 
main and mobile;
• arrival and departure briefing requirements; and
• information technology requirements.
The reception, staging, onward movement and integration requirements for 
formed unit personnel is likely to be different from that required by individual 
augmentees.
Casualty reporting and mortuary affairs
3A .7. In-theatre casualty reporting will be coordinated by the compassionate 
and casualty cell in theatre, to Joint Casualty and Compassionate Centre using 
JSP 751, Joint Casualty and Compassionate Policy and Procedures. However, 
J1 staff should consider the following:
• locations of casualty cells;
• location of, and contacts at, embassies/high commissions;
59
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3A
Preparing, planning and projecting

• possible location of Role 2 (enhanced) and Role 3 medical 
treatment facilities on land and afloat (liaison with J4 medical/J4);
• location of host-nation hospitals (liaison with J4 medical);
• local sensitivities;
• facilities at airport of debarkation/seaport of disembarkation for 
repatriating bodies (including temporary mortuaries, other nations’ 
mortuary facilities and refrigeration units);
• MOD contractor’s knowledge of the location; and
• mortuary provision/mortuary management.
Captured persons
3A.8. UK personnel may be required to deal with captured persons.29 J1 
staff, in consultation with the Provost Marshal and legal services should be 
prepared to give advice on an effective means of managing and administering 
captured persons, thus avoiding any UK reputational damage or risking 
challenges in domestic or international courts.
Refugees and internally displaced persons
3A.9. Responsibility for refugees/internally displaced persons is not a 
military issue. In any operational deployment, responsibility rests with the 
UK government (FCDO). FCDO may, however, seek PJHQ’s assistance in 
managing refugees/internally displaced personnel. J1 staff should consider:
• possible locations for camps;
• level of host-nation support;
• level of assistance from coalition nations available;
• the lead civilian and military agencies;
• the estimated number of refugees and their likely condition; and
• likely medical facilities.
Deployment welfare package (overseas)
3A.10. The MOD is committed to providing the fullest possible level of welfare 
support practicable to Service personnel deployed overseas and on operations. 
However, the operational environment will dictate the extent to which this can 
be achieved. Full details of the deployment welfare package are covered in 
JSP 770, Tri-Service Operational and Non-Operational Welfare Policy.
29 See JDP 1-10, Captured Persons.
60
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3A
Preparing, planning and projecting

Chaplaincy provision
3A.11. Depending on the number and breakdown of personnel, dedicated 
chaplaincy provision may be required. In consultation with the PJHQ Staff 
Chaplain, J1 staff should consider the location of the chaplain, any requirement 
to facilitate a location for religious observance, as well as potential host-nation 
or coalition support that would allow a chaplain to exercise their role in 
accordance with Chapter 4.
Education and training
3A.12. Depending on the nature of the operation there may be a requirement 
to establish an education and training facility. J1 and J7 staff should consider:
• ongoing educational requirements;
• coalition support;
• longevity of the operation;
• location of training facility;
• collocation with welfare facility/sports hall/fitness area; and
• information technology requirements (intranet/Internet facilities).
Security
3A.13. The requirement for force protection is paramount. All of the above 
factors should be set against the prevailing security environment. J1 staff 
should consider:
• specific local dangers, including environmental threats (for 
example, mines);
• local justice systems;
• specific policing issues (for example, alcohol consumption);
• gender and equal opportunity issues; 30 and
• transport options.
Post-reconnaissance considerations
3A.14. Following the reconnaissance, planning staff will undertake work to 
complete the directives. The type/level of directive will dictate the level of J1 
detail required.
30 See United Nations Peacemaker web page on Gender and Women, Peace and Security . 
61
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3A
Preparing, planning and projecting

a. CDS to CJO – minimal content but with priorities highlighted.
b. CJO to JTFC – more in-depth content containing what PJHQ 
expects to be achieved and the general outcome of actions.
c. JTFC to force – in-depth J1 requirement, detailing what the force 
aims to achieve and how. Personnel under command of JTFC may 
include MOD civil servants, Commonwealth forces, exchange officers 
and contractors. JTFC directives should consider the following J1 
capabilities:
 o discipline;
 o morale;
 o security;
 o theatre visitors’ policy;
 o status of deployed civilians;
 o captured persons;
 o welfare;
 o casualty and compassionate policy;
 o policy for managing deceased personnel;
 o personnel reporting;
 o rest and recuperation policy;
 o operational location tracking; and
 o operational stress management policy. 
62
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3A
Preparing, planning and projecting

Notes
63
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
3A
Preparing, planning and projecting

[Page 74: No extractable text]

Chapter 4
Chapter 4 outlines personnel management to ensure 
that operations are sustained by trained and motivated 
personnel. It also covers the chaplaincy, casualty and 
compassionate management and mortuary affairs.
Section 1 – Personnel management . . . . . . . . . . 67
Section 2 – The Chaplaincy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Section 3 – Casualty and compassionate  
                   management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Section 4 – Mortuary affairs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
65
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 

Congregating like that, sharing 
a softer, more spiritual moment 
away from the war, strengthened 
one, not in any jingoistic way, 
but quietly. Among all the 
excitements and harshness, it 
helped to be reminded of our 
shared humanity.
 
General Cedric Delves describing his  
time commanding a Special Air Service (SAS) 
squadron in the Falklands; he recalled 
making time for chaplain-led services, which 
were apparently attended even by the most 
hard-bitten troops.  
Taken from Across an Angry Sea
”
“
66
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

Chapter 4
Sustaining personnel 
support
Section 1 – Personnel management
4.1. The importance of sustaining effective personnel support activities during 
the execution phase of an operation cannot be over-emphasised. It provides 
both the command and deployed individuals with the reassurance that the 
administrative support network is in place to underpin their needs, thereby 
creating the conditions to maintain morale and confidence for individuals and 
units to operate to their best ability. Sustainment of personnel on operations 
in the home base, or outside of an overseas theatre, is organic to the parent 
unit or as directed by the joint military commander in the case of personnel 
deployed to assist UK operations and resilience activity.
Roulement in place 
4.2. The provision of roulement and rest and recuperation will depend on 
the operational context and is key to campaign continuity. When roulement 
is at the unit level, incoming units should take the lead. This ensures that the 
in-theatre focus can be maintained. Where possible, key continuity posts 
should be identified and filled. In-theatre training must also make best use of 
up-to-date practitioners and all training should be completed before the end 
of the handover period. Once in post, lessons identified need to be made 
available for the next roulement unit as soon as they are identified.
Rest and recuperation
4.3. The aim of rest and recuperation is to provide personnel who have been 
mentally and physically challenged by operational service time to recover and 
therefore sustain operational effectiveness. Full details on rest and recuperation 
policy can be found in Joint Service Publication (JSP) 760, Regulations for 
Leave and Other Types of Absence. Commanders should note the following 
rest and recuperation points.
• It can be disruptive, taking up to 20% of personnel at any one time 
and extending over two-thirds of a standard deployment – this 
67
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

can be exacerbated by any air bridge fragility when the timing of 
personnel movements can be significantly affected.
• Rest and recuperation is essential for individual welfare and long-term 
operational effectiveness and must be factored in to the personnel 
management plan.
• It demands managing in-theatre movement either side of the 
individuals’ time away from the threat area to ensure that the impact of 
rest and recuperation on the conduct of the campaign is minimised.
• Ideally rest and recuperation should take place in a low-threat 
environment close to theatre.
• Theatre commanders are reminded of the vital role rest and 
recuperation plays in ensuring personnel have an effective break 
to ‘recharge their batteries’ and therefore sustain operational 
effectiveness.
4.4. In the maritime environment, individuals or entire ships may 
roulement and the principles above would apply. Whilst there may be some 
circumstances in which individuals are granted leave for rest and recuperation, 
it is more likely that the ship would come off station and conduct a port visit in 
a low-threat area close to theatre to conduct essential maintenance and also 
enable a short stand down period for the ship’s company. 
Medical support
4.5. Maintaining optimal health and well-being (physical and mental) before, 
during and after operations is essential to maintain the effectiveness of the 
force. Personnel are supported by home base health services that help to 
optimise individual health and generate fit-for-task force elements. The chain 
of command and the Defence Medical Services (DMS) must collectively 
contribute to the provision of force health protection measures that will prevent 
injury and illness on operations. The chain of command, supported by the 
DMS, must also ensure all personnel receive training in essential (and, where 
appropriate, enhanced) first aid.31
31 The details of how medical support is planned, deployed, sustained and redeployed are 
in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.10(C), Allied Joint Doctrine for Medical Support  (with UK 
national elements).
68
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

4.6. Medical support for all deployed personnel will be in place to meet 
health needs and provide end-to-end casualty care in the event of trauma or 
acute illness. Personnel must be assured that if they are wounded, injured or 
sick, the deployed medical services have the capacity, resources and training 
to meet their needs. Commanders, supported by their medical advisers, 
are responsible for managing the medical risk for all deployed personnel. A 
comprehensive medical risk assessment, including the likely health threats and 
casualty estimate, must be a fundamental part of operational planning and 
sustainment activity.
Stress management
4.7. It is important to make stress management available for personnel before 
and after their rest and recuperation period because it ensures focus on the 
task before and after the break and prepares the individual for dealing with 
a short period of rest. Minimising apprehension over departing for rest and 
recuperation, and then getting swiftly back into routines on return, should be 
addressed during theatre-exit welfare briefings.
Personnel must be assured that their medical needs will be met
69
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

Section 2 – The Chaplaincy
4.8. Chaplains serve as an integral part of deployed forces. Their value is 
well proven and testified to by the operational experience of commanders 
and other Service personnel. Chaplains contribute to the resilience and 
well-being of the deployed force by providing pastoral care, moral leadership, 
ethical advice, spiritual guidance (of all faiths and none) as well as facilitating 
religious observances. They deliver these throughout the deployment cycle 
on pre-deployment training, reception, staging, onward movement and 
integration, operations, decompression and post-operational normalisation. 
Chaplains work in concert with welfare assets (deployed and rear echelon) to 
support operational outputs and contribute to the successful delivery of the 
moral component of fighting power.
Role
4.9. Chaplains are responsible for their personal and professional conduct 
whilst on operations and must be able to justify their actions and practice. 
They adhere to all legal requirements and act in accordance with their 
non-combatant (unarmed) status under the Geneva Conventions, international 
humanitarian law and UK law. Chaplains promote spiritual and pastoral care, 
the well-being of all personnel and respect the right of religious observance 
Chaplains of various religions support our Service personnel
70
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

of every person. They act in a manner to justify trust and confidence, being 
diligent to fostering a culture of care, especially in the midst of war or other 
challenging operations. Chaplains promote moral reflection and integrity, 
allowing personnel to achieve the highest levels of professional competence, 
whilst accepting moral ownership of actions in the operational environment. 
4.10. Chaplains are under the command of their commanding officers or 
formation commander who exercise tactical command over the chaplain 
assigned to the unit/formation. On operations with a designated Joint Force 
Senior Chaplain, they will exercise tactical control over chaplains in theatre. 
However, overall chaplaincy control remains with the single-Service heads of 
chaplaincy or their delegated representatives who retain full command of their 
chaplains.
4.11. The Armed Forces’ Chaplaincy Policy Board has issued direction on 
command and chaplaincy control and professional confidentiality. The relevant 
passage on professional confidentiality states:
Religious observance
4.12. Chaplains conduct Divine worship and provide opportunities for 
religious observance to ensure that religious needs of all personnel are 
met. They are required to act in accordance with the practice of their faith 
traditions and follow the regulations of their own faith authorities. They will 
also facilitate religious observance for those who seek it from any religious 
tradition, incorporating faith-building opportunities and facilitating ceremonial 
observance, including ramp and vigil services, repatriations and military 
funerals. Deployed chaplains have reachback access to tri-Service civilian 
chaplains (to the military) for specialist advice and support for Jewish, Muslim, 
Hindu, Sikh and Buddhist personnel. 
Professional confidentiality between a chaplain and an individual 
is fundamental to the pastoral relationship. This confidentiality 
does not allow for the free passage of information to a third 
party – irrespective of appointment or status – since this would 
constitute a breach of pastoral trust. Disclosure of confidential 
information can only take place if the prior permission of the 
individual has been obtained.
71
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support
“

4.13. Within the military community, for important single and tri-Service 
anniversaries (for example, Remembrance) an accompanying service is usually 
offered. Such observance is usually led by the chaplain. In the event of fatality, 
the chaplain will normally be expected to conduct a repatriation service for the 
benefit of personnel, for the comfort of relatives and as a mark of respect to 
the fallen.
4.14. Some deployments may come at an important family and community 
time (for example, Christmas, Ramadan and so on). The presence of a 
chaplain will provide an opportunity for practical support and the opportunity 
for reflection and celebration.
Resources and training
4.15. Chaplains must be able to function in any operational environment, 
no matter how austere, and therefore must be appropriately trained and 
resourced for their task. They will need to meet the required pre-deployment 
training, physical and medical standards as stipulated by Permanent Joint 
Headquarters (PJHQ) or other deploying authority. Chaplains should be 
adequately resourced with field equipment, accommodation, information 
technology, military transport, communications and force protection 
appropriate to the operational environment to enable them to work effectively 
across a dispersed force. Access to J1 (Personnel) and medical personnel 
should be a key consideration for resource planning.
Relationship with coalition partners
4.16. Under both North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and UK doctrine, 
the provision and delivery of chaplaincy on operations remains a national 
responsibility. Chaplains deployed on coalition operations must, however, 
endeavour to build effective working relationships with coalition chaplains 
within the constraints of memoranda of understanding and national caveats. 
72
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support
I would as soon think of going into battle without my artillery as 
without my Chaplains.
Field Marshal Montgomery from the Thanksgiving Service in 
Cairo Cathedral after victory at El Alamein in 1942
“

Section 3 – Casualty and 
compassionate management
Procedures
4.17. The utmost importance and sensitivity must be placed upon dealing 
with casualty and compassionate cases. The casualty reporting and 
notification process is coordinated by the Joint Casualty and Compassionate 
Centre (JCCC), part of Defence Business Services, following the policy 
contained in JSP 751, Joint Casualty and Compassionate Policy and 
Procedures. However, the role the single Services play in casualty and 
compassionate management is equally important, as each remains 
responsible for their own personnel and their families. 32
Medical evacuation
4.18. The Ministry of Defence (MOD) policy for aeromedical evacuation is 
contained in Air Publication (AP) 3394, The Royal Air Force Aeromedical 
Evacuation Service. Responsible authorities (medical treatment facilities, 
headquarters or individual units) requiring aeromedical evacuation must follow 
the procedures laid down in AP3394. Any casualty who is moved by air using 
the aeromedical evacuation system will be reported and monitored as a 
casualty by the JCCC.
Reception arrangements for military patients
4.19. Military patients evacuated back to the UK from overseas deployments 
are received into the National Health Service (NHS) where they will be triaged 
and receive acute secondary care. The MOD and the Department of Health 
and Social Care have agreed a requirement for an integrated plan to cover 
the reporting of patients, their medical reception, movement, tracking, care 
and administration within the NHS. The chain of command and DMS will 
then support the patient through rehabilitation and their return to physical, 
psychological and social function, including arranging for any specialist 
rehabilitation required. There may be a clinical requirement to continue the 
treatment of captured persons in the UK; legal permissions for this may be 
challenging but must be obtained by the chain of command before evacuation. 
Refer to Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 1-10, Captured Persons for detail. 
32 Detailed instructions are in JSP 751, Joint Casualty and Compassionate Policy and 
Procedures.
73
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

Section 4 – Mortuary affairs
4.20. Mortuary affairs describes every aspect of the capabilities available 
and the process of returning a fatality from their point of death to their final 
resting place or releasing them to their family. This includes all constituent 
and contributory parts from across the MOD, single Services, Civil Service 
and contracted support, and every aspect according to the Defence lines of 
development framework.
a. The mortuary affairs chain is the physical process of moving a 
fatality from their point of death to their final resting place or releasing 
them to their family.
b. Mortuary affairs provides an effective and efficient system of fatality 
recovery, identification, investigation, preparation and repatriation of 
our personnel. This is underpinned by the need to ensure that, at all 
stages, any handling of remains is conducted in accordance with the 
expectations of fellow Service members, next of kin, the UK general 
public, government policy, interest groups (such as the International 
Committee of the Red Cross), religious denominations and international 
treaties. Every unit is duty bound to understand its mortuary affairs 
chain responsibility.
Roles and responsibilities
4.21. PJHQ is responsible for planning mortuary affairs in support of an 
overseas operation. PJHQ will:
• liaise with front line commands (FLCs) to assign the required 
mortuary affairs capabilities to the deploying force elements and 
dictate in-theatre mortuary affairs policy;
• maintain strong links with the JCCC to direct repatriation of Service 
personnel within JSP 751, Joint Casualty and Compassionate Policy 
and Procedures; and
• in consultation with JCCC, be responsible for informing the Press 
Office when the next of kin of the casualty/deceased has been 
informed.
74
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

4.22. The JCCC should be informed of a fatality at the earliest opportunity 
and is responsible for organising and coordinating all aspects of the mortuary 
affairs process in the UK during an operation and overseas during peace time. 
They will:
• provide compassionate advice, coordinate repatriation, coordinate 
activities to inform the next of kin, contract civilian morticians; and
• be the appointed Service registrar for initial registration of all deaths 
occurring on operations and in certain other circumstances.
Single-Service commands
4.23. The command headquarters of the single Services are responsible 
for planning and assigning force elements to an operation. This may include 
understanding and supporting mortuary affairs capability.
4.24. Where a fatality has occurred, Service chaplains are available to provide 
support and comfort to personnel and family, whatever the rank or unit, and 
carry out, or facilitate, the appropriate ceremony according to the individual’s 
belief or family wishes. Service chaplains can also assist with informing the 
next of kin.
Permanent Joint Headquarters is responsible for planning mortuary affairs
75
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

Framework for current operations
4.25. Deceased personnel should be transported with sensitivity and 
as quickly as the situation permits. If the Army War Graves Service is not 
deployed to theatre, recovery and transporting deceased personnel is the 
responsibility of units and formations in line with direction given by the national 
logistic component headquarters. The medical chain may be used if spare 
capacity exists. A qualified ammunition technical officer must certify any 
remains are free from ordnance, such as ammunition or unexploded ordnance, 
prior to releasing the remains into the repatriation chain. Deceased personnel 
should be transported to either:
• a temporary mortuary facility, if one is established, where a medical 
officer or other competent practitioner can certify death; or
• an empty treatment room in a medical facility.
4.26. Units are to deliver all personal effects and provide an appropriate 
person who knew the deceased to identify the body. Morticians from the 
JCCC contract will arrive with the strategic air transport and will prepare and 
escort the body to the home base coroner. This includes participating in the 
ceremony, according to the status of the death.
4.27 . Whilst mortuary affairs is a J1 responsibility (supported by J4 
(Logistics)), there must be close cooperation and integration with deployed 
medical support. Medical staff will always prioritise the care of live casualties, 
but the casualty chain (or Operational Patient Care Pathway) can be used 
to support mortuary affairs. The mortuary affairs contribution of the DMS is 
therefore integral to the deployed medical support. The Operational Patient 
Care Pathway will be determined during the operational planning phase, but 
will be flexible and adapted to each operational and tactical situation. Note that 
only a medical officer or other competent medical practitioner can certify a 
death. 
4.28. J1 staff provide the backbone of the fatality reporting system. They 
support units and headquarters by completing appropriate paperwork, 
following reporting processes in JSP 751, Joint Casualty and Compassionate 
Policy and Procedures, and coordinate with the JCCC.
76
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

4.29. Support to the Coroner’s Office. An investigator (drawn from one of 
the three Services) will be appointed to act as the coroner’s officer and be 
responsible for investigating deaths of UK Service personnel deployed on 
operations and also those sponsored visitors and contractors subject to the 
Service Discipline Acts. They will ensure the coroner’s authority is exercised 
and that appropriate provision is made to secure evidence to allow the coroner 
to hold a formal inquest in the UK in line with current legislation.
4.30. Front line commands. The FLCs are responsible for implementing 
and executing their part of the mortuary affairs chain and process. Educating 
personnel about the mortuary affairs chain and their role is essential for their 
peace of mind as well as that of their families and friends. FLCs will control the 
initial aspects of a fatality incident and initiates the mortuary affairs chain. They 
recover the fatality and their personal effects, inform the JCCC (normally via 
a central compassionate/casualty cell), provide a positive (or tentative) initial 
identification and liaise with all other personnel involved in the mortuary affairs 
chain, including the theatre controlling headquarters. FLCs must remain flexible 
and adaptable, reacting to the tactical situation whilst correctly administering 
their fatalities.
4.31. Temporary interment. The MOD’s policy is ‘to repatriate to the UK the 
bodies of deceased Service personnel, including foreign and commonwealth 
personnel wherever possible and as soon as practicable’. However, temporary 
interment may be required in any number of extreme circumstances but can 
only be authorised by the theatre controlling headquarters or PJHQ. The 
correct procedures must be followed, recognising that the fatalities will be 
disinterred and repatriated when the situation allows.
Command and control
4.32. Overall in-theatre command and control resides with the UK force 
headquarters commanding the operation. This can also be a national 
contingent commander/multinational commander when the UK is contributing 
to multinational operations. Although in steady-state operations the processes 
and procedures are a J1/J4 function, during large-scale/direct intervention 
operations may be commanded from the J3 desk. It is the responsibility of the 
fatality’s parent unit to inform the higher formation of their fatality and fatality 
evacuation requirements.
77
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

Operational memorials
4.33. Unless the next of kin requests other arrangements, the MOD officially 
commemorates Service personnel who die on operations by providing a 
Service pattern headstone and their grave is maintained forever. The men and 
women of our Armed Forces (Regular and Reserve) killed on duty or as a result 
of terrorist action since World War 2 are also commemorated by name on the 
Armed Forces Memorial at the National Memorial Arboretum in Staffordshire. 
The single Services additionally maintain their own roll of honour.
4.34. The desire to further commemorate fallen comrades by erecting 
memorials locally in theatre, often driven as much by the requirement to bring 
closure to those left behind as by the need to formally mark the loss of the 
individuals, is well understood. However, there are certain practicalities that 
must be addressed prior to authority being granted for any memorial to be 
erected and dedicated in theatre, for which single-Service advice should be 
sought.33
33 See Queen’s Regulations (Royal Navy) J9526; (British Army) J8.134; (Royal Air Force) 
J174A.(3).
Operational memorials are an important part of the military tradition
78
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

Key points
• Maintaining optimal health and well-being (physical and mental) before, 
during and after operations is essential to maintain the effectiveness of 
the force.
• Rest and recuperation is essential for individual welfare and long-term 
operational effectiveness.
• Roulement of personnel is key to campaign continuity.
• Chaplains are an essential part of the deployed force and work in concert 
with welfare assets.
• We must place the utmost importance on the way we deal with casualties 
and fatalities.
• The JCCC should be informed of casualties and fatalities at the earliest 
opportunity. The JCCC is responsible for organising and coordinating all 
aspects of the mortuary affairs process.
• Where a fatality has occurred, Service chaplains are available to provide 
support and comfort to personnel and family.
• The role the single Services play in casualty management is important, as 
each remains responsible for their own personnel and their families.
• The MOD policy for aeromedical evacuation is contained in AP3394, The 
Royal Air Force Aeromedical Evacuation Service.
• Whilst mortuary affairs is a J1 personnel responsibility (supported by J4 
logistics), there must be close cooperation and integration with deployed 
medical support. 
• Mortuary affairs describes every aspect of the capabilities available and 
the process of returning a fatality from their point of death to their final 
resting place or releasing them to their family.
79
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
4
Sustaining personnel support

[Page 90: No extractable text]

Chapter 5 describes operational recovery and the 
importance of managing personnel once their contribution to 
operations is over.
Section 1 – Operational recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Section 2 – Decompression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Section 3 – Drawdown  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Section 4 – Recuperation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
81
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Chapter 5

People who put themselves 
on the line and sacrifice their 
own safety for the greater good 
and for others, and anyone in 
any profession whose concern 
is the welfare for other people 
instead of the individual, are 
inspiring and important.
 
Chris Hemsworth”
“
82
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

Chapter 5
Recovering combat power
Section 1 – Operational recovery
5.1. Operational recovery from an ongoing campaign is integral to the 
roulement process. Planning must cover both the smooth handover of the 
operation to the relief-in-place and returning personnel from theatre or a 
deployed location. This latter process completes the entire planning cycle, 
back to the start of the force generation phase, and it does not end at the 
return from deployment. Units that have suffered casualties in particular will 
require recuperation both in terms of replacing personnel and in returning all 
unit personnel back to full fitness.
5.2. Personnel involved in running down or terminating operations will have 
additional responsibilities for closing down support infrastructure, personnel 
and materiel redeployment arrangements, and ensuring all aspects of 
personnel welfare are considered. When reducing UK commitments, particular 
attention to aspects of welfare support provided for those remaining in theatre 
is required. Some units or individuals may be reliant on the arrangements in 
place for the larger presence and must still be catered for. Care must also be 
taken to ensure wider liaison with contractors to ensure timely and effective 
drawdown of all supporting welfare assets, concurrent with the campaign 
run-down plan.
Section 2 – Decompression
5.3. At the end of an operational tour, personnel may require a period  
of decompression before returning home. This period of time is usually  
24–36 hours and detailed guidance and instructions will be provided by 
Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) J1 (Personnel) staff. Decompression 
involves placing personnel into a structured and monitored environment where 
they can begin to wind down and return to a routine, peacetime environment. It 
allows time to begin rationalising thoughts about normal Service and family life. 
Decompression, as a component of overall operational stress management, 
83
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

is a process by which ‘personnel who deploy together, unwind together’. 
Decompression fulfils three functions, it:
• greatly improves the quality of homecoming having given units the 
opportunity to rationalise and discuss operational experiences, 
receive mandatory briefings and unwind together;
• provides a positive mental health effect which is related to the levels 
of combat exposure experienced; and
• enables adjustment to a non-operational routine.
5.4. In the maritime environment decompression will often happen as the 
ship transits back to the home port, either through on board activities or during 
a port visit. However, it is important that decompression is also factored in for 
any personnel not returning by ship, for example, advance parties and those 
individuals or ship’s companies that are roulementing and returning by air.
5.5. Decompression will normally form the first part of the overall 
post-operational stress management process, subject to current policy and 
PJHQ guidance. Commanders should select mature and robust leaders to 
deliver and supervise decompression activity.
Post-operational stress management
5.6. The key to successful post-operational stress management and 
demobilisation of Reserves lies in awareness. Individuals, families, colleagues 
and the chain of command all need to be alert to the signs of stress so that 
early intervention can lessen the risk of subsequent problems (which can 
include clinical disorders, disciplinary and social problems and poor work 
performance). While post-operational stress management procedures are 
generic for all operations (at home and overseas), commanders should adapt 
them for the needs of their particular operation.34 The aim is to deliver the same 
level of support to all personnel, while recognising their differing circumstances 
and allowing for certain elements to be discretionary depending on the level 
and intensity of operational activity and resultant exposure to stressors.
5.7. For commanders, an integral part of post-operational stress 
management is the debriefing process on return to the UK, including media 
34 Detailed post-operational stress management policy is currently contained in Joint 
Service Publication (JSP) 770, Tri-Service Operational and Non-Operational Welfare Policy , 
but will transfer to JSP 661, Health & Wellbeing Policy  once it is published.
84
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

interviews, where appropriate and as organised by Directorate of Defence 
Communications. It is therefore important for those individuals to have their 
various post-operational interviews and operational experience interviews as 
soon as practicable on return from theatre.
5.8. Leadership, good communication and training are also fundamental to 
prevent and manage operational stress. This is because operational stress 
management is primarily an executive, not a medical, responsibility. Stress 
management policy must address the fact that there will be symptoms of 
stress and provide tools to manage it. Briefing individuals prior to deploying 
and on their return, either individually or as part of a group, can help. Similarly, 
open discussion on issues arising from operational experiences and dealing 
with any issues should be addressed in a timely manner. Commanding officers 
are to refer to, or liaise with, medical authorities at an early stage if there is 
any concern about an individual’s well-being. Medical intervention is always 
required when symptoms are prolonged or severe doubt exists over the mental 
health of an individual.
5.9. Once an individual returns from operations, close contact may diminish 
and it will often be family members who will be the first to notice changes. 
This can be particularly relevant when an individual is reassigned to another 
unit. Families, and where applicable civilian employers, must be fully engaged 
throughout the post-operational stress management process.
85
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power
Once an individual returns from operations, it will often be family members who  
will be the first to notice changes in behaviour 

Section 3 – Drawdown
Welfare drawdown
5.10. Drawdown of J1 welfare equipment is subject to planned redistribution 
or disposal, depending on the required speed of that drawdown. Where 
possible, J1 equipment should be returned to the in-theatre J1 team for 
assessment and grading prior to disposal decisions being made. In the event 
of a ‘rapid’ drawdown, not all aspirations with regard to the onward movement 
of equipment may be achieved.
5.11. This is relevant to both Ministry of Defence (MOD)-owned J1 equipment 
and contractor and integrated project team equipment. The decision to 
dispose of infrastructure will not be made by J1. In accordance with the gifting 
regulations, it is unlikely that any J1 equipment will be suitable for gifting.
5.12. If it is proposed that equipment is to be gifted, this is to be undertaken 
in consultation with J1, the in-theatre Civil Secretary and J8 (Finance and 
human resources). Any decision to dispose of equipment needs to be weighed 
against whether it could be used by someone else either in the joint operations 
area, in another operational area or back at a unit’s location. Moreover, the 
presentational aspect of UK forces disposing of equipment must also be 
considered. Equipment belonging to contractors and integrated project teams 
is to be relocated in accordance with their requirements. The assessment of J1 
equipment is subjective and a full audit trail recording the processes relating to 
equipment disposal is to be maintained at every stage.
Personnel drawdown
5.13. The J1 element of any drawdown plan is always dictated by the  
J3 (Operations)/J5 (Plans) estimate. Drawdown planning is completed by  
J3/J5 and the new force laydown proposed to the Campaign Management 
Priorities Board for ministerial approval. In terms of changes to the operational 
establishment table, this is only ever completed by J3 as the capability 
owners. Once all the changes are made, an operational establishment table 
review is held with all personnel agencies agreeing alterations to the individual 
augmentee posts.
86
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

Operational memorabilia
5.14. As a rule, it is important to recognise that all captured materiel becomes 
the UK government’s property. There is often a desire to retain items for 
museums, units or individuals, but Service Police searches of military freight 
and personal baggage will seek to identify such items. An application for the 
return of any item of memorabilia for official use must be submitted to the 
MOD Authority for Operational Memorabilia for approval.
Section 4 – Recuperation
5.15. Recuperation is defined as: the replacement of resources, including 
personnel and materiel, following operational activity in preparation for further 
operations. It includes the training necessary to restore force elements to their 
normal readiness level.35 Recuperation normally takes place in the strategic 
base as part of the operational planning cycle.
35 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
Drawdown of J1 welfare equipment is subject to planned redistribution or disposal
87
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

Planning
5.16. Planning for, and reporting on, recuperation should encompass all 
aspects of force generation and sustainability. This specifically includes:
• personnel – replacing operational losses and achieving harmony 
guidelines;
• equipment – replacing, repairing and servicing equipment;
• training – rebuilding collective and individual performance; and
• logistics – replacing spent resources.
Readiness
5.17. Readiness is the time in which a force is to be made ready to carry 
out the tasks for which it is organised, equipped and trained, measured by 
its staff strength, equipment state and collective performance training level. 
Recuperation is a precursor to achieving the required readiness criteria. 
Defence Strategy 2021 sets out recuperation targets mandating the readiness 
requirements of force elements, following contingent operations overseas, 
within which they must be capable of carrying out the full range  
of operations demanded by concurrency assumptions. These generic  
targets are only valid if force elements are operating at, or within, routine 
concurrency levels.
Process
5.18. Recuperation is designed to bring force elements and materiel back 
to their pre-operational readiness level or in accordance with revised target 
levels. Action must be taken to ensure that where personnel or resources are 
‘double-earmarked’, other contingencies remain sustainable or are discounted 
from consideration as concurrent operations.
88
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

Key points
• Operational recovery from a campaign will be integral to the roulement 
process.
• Units involved in running down or completing operations will have 
additional responsibilities for closing down support infrastructure and 
arrangements and ensuring all aspects of personnel and welfare are 
considered.
• Care must also be taken to ensure wider liaison with contractors to 
ensure timely and effective drawdown of all supporting welfare assets, 
concurrent with the campaign run-down plan.
• Decompression involves placing groups into a structured and monitored 
environment where they can begin to wind down and return to a routine, 
peacetime environment.
• Commanders should select mature and robust leaders to deliver and 
supervise decompression activity.
• The key to successful post-operational stress management lies in 
awareness.
• Leadership, good communication and training are also fundamental to 
prevent and manage operational stress. 
• As a rule, it is important to recognise that all captured materiel becomes 
the UK government’s property.
• The J1 element of any drawdown plan is always dictated by the J3/J5 
estimate.
89
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

Notes
90
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
5
Recovering combat power

Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
ACDS  Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff 
AGAI  Army General Administrative Instruction
AJP  Allied joint publication
AP  Air Publication
BPG  business process guide
BR  Book of Reference
CDS  Chief of the Defence Staff
CIVSEC Civil Secretary
CJO  Chief of Joint Operations
DCMO  Defence Crisis Management Organisation
DE&S  Defence Equipment and Support
DMS  Defence Medical Services
DSTA IA Defence Single Tasking Authority Individual Augmentation
FCDO  Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
FLC  front line command
HQ SJC(UK) Headquarters Standing Joint Command (United Kingdom)
JCCC  Joint Casualty and Compassionate Cell
JDP  joint doctrine publication
JFLogCHQ Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters
JPA  Joint Personnel Administration
JSP  joint Service publication
JTFC  joint task force commander
JTFHQ  Joint Task Force Headquarters
MACA  military aid to the civil authorities
MOD  Ministry of Defence
MP  member of Parliament
91
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NHS  National Health Service
OPLOC  operational location
PJHQ  Permanent Joint Headquarters
S2O  Support to Operations
SJC(UK) Standing Joint Commander (United Kingdom)
SPO  Security Policy and Operations 
TRiM  traumatic risk management
VeRR  Volunteer ex-Regular Reserve
UK  United Kingdom
 
92
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

Section 2 – Terms and definitions
campaign plan  
The actionable expression of a joint force commander’s intent, articulated to 
subordinate commanders through plans, directives and orders. (JDP 0-01.1)
captured persons  
The generic term given to all individuals who are captured and held by UK 
Armed Forces on operations overseas, whether they be prisoners of war, 
protected persons as defined in Geneva Convention IV, or detainees or 
security internees, whether or not the Geneva Conventions apply. (JDP 0-01.1)
contractor support to operations  
All support provided to UK military operations by non-regular forces.  
Note: it includes sponsored reserves, contractors on deployed operations and 
private military and security companies. (JDP 0-01.1)
detailed deployment plan  
The plan encompasses all orders and directions that allocate strategic lift 
assets and detail the embarkation of personnel and cargoes to mount an 
operation. (JDP 0-01.1)
force generation  
The process of providing suitably trained and equipped forces, and their 
means of deployment, recovery and sustainment to meet all current and 
potential future tasks, within required readiness and preparation times.  
(JDP 0-01.1)
joint operations area 
A temporary area within a theatre of operations defined by the Supreme Allied 
Commander Europe, in which a designated joint force commander plans and 
executes a specific mission at the operational level. (NATOTerm)
military aid to the civil authorities 
Military operations conducted in the UK and Crown Dependencies involving 
the employment of Defence resources as requested by a government 
department or civil authority.  
Note: these operations are subject to Defence Ministerial approval, either prior 
to, or at the time of the event, except in immediate risk of life situations.  
(JDP 0-01.1)
93
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

mounting 
All preparations made in areas designated for the purpose, in anticipation 
of an operation. It includes the assembly in the mounting area, preparation, 
and maintenance within the mounting area, movement to loading points, and 
subsequent embarkation into ships, craft, or aircraft if applicable. (NATOTerm)
readiness 
The period of time measured from an initiation order to the moment when the 
headquarters or unit is ready to perform its task from its peacetime location 
(permanent or forward deployed) or ready for deployment. (JDP 0-01.1)
redeployment 
The relocation of forces from an area of operations to a national location. 
(NATOTerm)
strategic base  
Comprises military assets, industrial capacity both national and international, 
civilian contractors and National Health Service hospitals.  
Note: Military assets include elements owned by the three single Services, 
Strategic Command and Defence Equipment and Support. (JDP 0-01.1)
sustainment 
The provision of personnel, logistics, medical support, military engineering 
support, finance and contract support necessary for Alliance operations and 
missions. (NATOTerm)
94
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

95
JDP 1-05 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2022Crown copyright 2022
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc


