Fourth Edition
Joint Doctrine Publication 02 
UK Operations: the Defence 
Contribution to Resilience

[Page 2: No extractable text]

JointJoint  Doctrine Publication 02, Doctrine Publication 02, UK Operations: the Defence UK Operations: the Defence 
Contribution to ResilienceContribution to Resilience – key points – key points
Military aid to the civil authorities Military aid to the civil authorities 
(MACA)(MACA)
Military operations conducted in the UK Military operations conducted in the UK 
and Crown Dependencies involving the and Crown Dependencies involving the 
employment of Defence resources as employment of Defence resources as 
requested by a government department or requested by a government department or 
civil authority. This is subject to Defence civil authority. This is subject to Defence 
ministerial approval, either prior to, or at the ministerial approval, either prior to, or at the 
time of an event.time of an event.
MACA principlesMACA principles
MACA may be provided where:MACA may be provided where:
• • there is a definite need to act and the there is a definite need to act and the 
tasks the Armed Forces are being asked tasks the Armed Forces are being asked 
to perform are clear;to perform are clear;
• • other options, including mutual aid, other options, including mutual aid, 
commercial alternatives and the voluntary commercial alternatives and the voluntary 
sector have been discounted;sector have been discounted;
• • the civil authority lacks the necessary the civil authority lacks the necessary 
capability to fulfil the task and it is capability to fulfil the task and it is 
unreasonable or prohibitively expensive to unreasonable or prohibitively expensive to 
expect it to develop one; orexpect it to develop one; or
• • the civil authority has all or some the civil authority has all or some 
capability, but it may not be available capability, but it may not be available 
immediately, or to the required scale, and immediately, or to the required scale, and 
the urgency of the task requires rapid the urgency of the task requires rapid 
external support from the MOD.external support from the MOD.
Charging principlesCharging principles
• • Full: Full: pre-planned operations.pre-planned operations.
• • Marginal: Marginal: dynamic situations such as dynamic situations such as 
the response to flooding.the response to flooding.
• • Zero: Zero: where life is at risk, or the where life is at risk, or the 
provision of liaison and/or a military provision of liaison and/or a military 
assessment team.assessment team.
Full cost should be assumed to be Full cost should be assumed to be 
the default setting, although precise the default setting, although precise 
arrangements may be arranged on a arrangements may be arranged on a 
case-by-case basis between the Ministry of case-by-case basis between the Ministry of 
Defence (MOD) and the requesting agency.Defence (MOD) and the requesting agency.
LiaisonLiaison
The MOD maintains a standing resilience The MOD maintains a standing resilience 
liaison officer network comprising:  liaison officer network comprising:  
4 Royal Naval regional liaison officers, 4 Royal Naval regional liaison officers, 
18 joint regional liaison officers (all British 18 joint regional liaison officers (all British 
Army) and 9 Royal Air Force regional liaison Army) and 9 Royal Air Force regional liaison 
officers. If their personal details are unknown officers. If their personal details are unknown 
to the civil authorities then assistance may to the civil authorities then assistance may 
be sought in the first instance by e-mailing: be sought in the first instance by e-mailing: 
SJCUK-HQ-Mailbox@mod.gov.uk SJCUK-HQ-Mailbox@mod.gov.uk 
AuthorisationAuthorisation
The default setting is that a Defence The default setting is that a Defence 
minister must authorise all requests for minister must authorise all requests for 
Defence assistance. Exceptions to this Defence assistance. Exceptions to this 
policy includes ‘immediate assistance’ policy includes ‘immediate assistance’ 
(life at risk, a need to alleviate distress (life at risk, a need to alleviate distress 
or to protect significant property). In this or to protect significant property). In this 
instance, local military commanders can instance, local military commanders can 
authorise deployments and requests authorise deployments and requests 
relating to Defence estate. Depending upon relating to Defence estate. Depending upon 
whether the civil authorities’ intended use is whether the civil authorities’ intended use is 
considered contentious or not, the request considered contentious or not, the request 
will be authorised either by a senior military will be authorised either by a senior military 
officer locally or by a senior military officer in officer locally or by a senior military officer in 
the MOD.the MOD.
This page can be torn out for reference

[Page 4: No extractable text]

i
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 
Joint Doctrine Publication 02
UK Operations: the Defence 
Contribution to Resilience
Joint Doctrine Publication 02 (JDP 02) (4th Edition),  
dated November 2021, is promulgated as directed 
by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre

Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via:
 
E-mail: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk Telephone: 01793 31 4216/4220
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2021) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated).
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbeywood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk
Distribution
All DCDC publications, including a biannual DCDC Publications Disk, can be 
demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre. 
  
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet (RLI) at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/defnet/JFC/Pages/dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
ii
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 

iii
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Foreword
Defence has a key role supporting lead government departments, devolved 
administrations and civil authorities as they prepare, respond and recover from 
disruptive challenges and major national events. This publication incorporates 
the latest UK government policy on military aid to the civil authorities. The 
pandemic event of 2020 and 2021, the increasing prevalence of climate 
change-driven events, and the attack in Salisbury in 2018 highlight the 
breadth, scale and complexity of the challenges that the UK faces.  
This publication provides guidance and practical understanding to both a 
military and civilian audience on how Defence can support the civil authorities 
to deal with events such as natural hazards, major incidents or malicious 
attacks in the UK and the Crown Dependencies. Accordingly, I commend this 
publication to the widest audience.
Admiral Sir Tim Fraser KCB ADC  
Vice Chief of the Defence Staff

iv
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 

v
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Preface
 
Purpose
1.   Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 02, UK Operations: the Defence 
Contribution to Resilience, 4th Edition describes how Defence contributes 
to the nation’s resilience. JDP 02 recognises that resilience is only achieved 
through a fused, interagency approach to civil contingency.
Context
2. The fourth edition of JDP 02 incorporates thinking from Global Britain in 
a competitive age: The Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development 
and Foreign Policy published in 2021, reflects upon revised cross-government 
and devolved resilience policy, and it notes the lessons learned in the years 
2016 through to 2021. This publication:
• complements Defence in a competitive age, the Defence Command 
Paper 2021; and
• notes the Cabinet Office’s updated assessment of the key risks 
that the UK faces as set out in the National Risk Register of 
December 2020. 
Scope
3. JDP 02 explains the ways and means through which military aid to the 
civil authorities (MACA) is delivered in the UK and the Crown Dependencies. 
MACA contributes towards a resilient homeland, capable of enduring 
disruptive events of natural origin as well those caused by human actions, 
including inadvertent, deliberate and occasionally malign activities. Resilience 
is foundational to ensuring the UK’s security and way of life. Effective resilience 
underlines to potential adversaries that the benefits of malign activity will be 
largely denied, though of course not every eventuality can be deterred, and 
it thereby contributes to the UK’s deterrence. JDP 02 makes an important 
contribution to the protect function of the Integrated Operating Framework 
explained in JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine. JDP 02 only covers MACA; 

vi
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
purely military activities that contribute to defence of the homeland, such as 
the protection of national airspace, sit outside the scope of this publication. 
4. The term MACA applies to operations undertaken on behalf of other 
government departments within the UK, its territorial waters and exclusive 
economic zone, and the Crown Dependencies. Operations undertaken by 
Defence within the Overseas Territories are outside the scope of MACA.
5. In producing this JDP , the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre 
undertook a wide consultation. This included the Cabinet Office and across 
wider Defence, including: the MOD; the Headquarters Standing Joint Command 
(United Kingdom); the three single-Service Commands (Royal Navy, British Army 
and Royal Air Force); Headquarters Defence Infrastructure Organisation; and the 
regional resilience liaison officers of all three Services.
Audience
6. JDP 02 informs a broad civil and military readership. It provides guidance 
to those in Defence responsible for the planning, force generation, and 
command and control of Defence assets tasked to provide support to the 
civil authorities. The JDP also provides other government departments, 
devolved administrations, local authorities, partners and agencies with a 
broad understanding of the Defence contribution to resilience as part of a 
multi-agency approach to support the civil authorities.
Structure
7. This JDP comprises four chapters. An outline of their contents is described 
below.
a. Chapter 1 – Context explains civil contingency in the UK and the part 
that Defence plays. Factors that influence civil contingency are highlighted, 
before describing the risk management process that underpins the UK 
approach to civil contingency.
b. Chapter 2 – Policy: ends outlines the MOD’s policy for providing 
support to the civil authorities. It considers the legal basis for MACA and 
the charging policy applied to other government departments and civil 
authorities making a MACA request.

vii
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
c. Chapter 3 – Process: ways details the end-to-end process for the 
employment, command and control, and recovery of Defence capability 
assigned to provide support to the civil authorities. It outlines Defence’s 
resilience roles, the military aid request mechanism and planning 
considerations.
d. Chapter 4 – Delivery: means considers Defence capability that 
may be tasked in support of MACA operations. It outlines how Defence 
conducts resilience education and trains alongside civil partners to 
prepare for potential civil contingency tasks.
Linkages
8. JDP 02 is linked to several policy documents, including:
• Global Britain in a competitive age: The Integrated Review of Security, 
Defence, Development and Foreign Policy, 2021 (referred to as the 
Integrated Review throughout);
• Defence in a competitive age, 2021 (referred to as the Defence 
Command Paper throughout);
• Responding to Emergencies: the UK Central Government Response 
Concept of Operations, updated April 2013;
• Cabinet Office Emergency Preparedness , March 2012; 
• Cabinet Office Emergency Response and Recovery , April 2010;
• Preparing Scotland, March 2016;
• Cabinet Office Lexicon of Civil Protection, February 2013; 
• The Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework , revised 2021;
• HM Treasury, Managing Public Money, revised May 2021; and
• Global Strategic Trends: The Future Starts Today.
It is also linked to statute (both primary and secondary) and powers recognised 
by the common law, namely the: 
• Civil Contingencies Act 2004;
• Civil Contingencies Act 2004 (Contingency Planning) (Scotland) 
Regulations 2005;
• Emergency Powers Act 1964; and
• Royal Prerogative.

viii
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
9. JDP 02 is linked to several doctrine publications. It sits below JDP 0-01, 
UK Defence Doctrine and it sits alongside other thematic doctrine publications, 
namely:
• JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine;
• JDP 04, Understanding and Decision-making ; 
• JDP 05, Shaping a Stable World: the Military Contribution; and
• Joint Doctrine: the interoperability framework.1
1 Joint Doctrine: the interoperability framework , Edition 2, July 2016.

ix
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Chapter 1 – Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – Policy: ends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Chapter 3 – Process: ways  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter 4 – Delivery: means. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131

[Page 14: No extractable text]

Chapter 1 explains civil contingency in the UK and the part 
that Defence plays. Factors that influence civil contingency 
are highlighted, before describing the risk management 
process that underpins the UK’s approach to civil 
contingency.
Section 1 – Civil contingency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – The UK operating environment  . . . . . . 17
Section 3 – Risks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Annex 1A – Devolved administrations  . . . . . . . . . 21
Annex 1B – Lead government departments and  
                   agencies across the devolved  
                   administrations    . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Annex 1C – Joint Emergency Services  
                   Interoperability Principles  . . . . . . . . . 28
1
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 1

”
“Our first goal is to build our national 
resilience, so that we are able to 
reduce the impact of acute shocks 
and longer-term challenges on lives 
and livelihoods in the UK. National 
resilience is the product of multiple 
factors, including effective and 
trusted governance, government 
capabilities, social cohesion, and 
individual and business resilience. 
 
Prime Minister’s vision for the UK in 2030, 
Integrated Review, 2021 
2
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

Chapter 1
Context
Section 1 – Civil contingency
For the purposes of this publication the following definitions apply.
military aid to the civil authorities  
Military operations conducted in the UK and Crown Dependencies 
involving the employment of Defence resources as requested by a 
government department or civil authority.  
Note: These operations are subject to Defence Ministerial approval, either 
prior to, or at the time of an event, except in immediate risk of life situations.
Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Terminology  
Supplement to NATOTerm
resilience 
Ability of the community, services, areas or infrastructure to detect, prevent, 
and, if necessary, to withstand, handle and recover from disruptive challenges.
Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1
1.1. In the UK the civil authorities take the lead in planning for, responding 
to and recovering from disruptive challenges and similar events. In this 
process the UK government exercises a broad coordinating authority, with 
devolved administrations responsible for conducting specific duties within their 
geographic boundaries. If civil authorities require assistance in this response, 
then military aid to the civil authorities (MACA) allows them to draw upon niche 
capabilities, general support and specific expertise held within Defence. 
1.2. MACA may be appropriate when civil capabilities and capacities 
are overwhelmed by an incident, or when preparing for, and supporting, 
major national events. MACA occurs frequently across the UK; examples of 
significant events include the following.
• Providing widespread and general support during flooding events.
3
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

• Providing security for large-scale, pre-planned events of international 
and national significance, such as the London Olympic Games in 
2012 and the G7 Summit in Carbis Bay, Cornwall in 2021. 
• Support to the civil authorities during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
including establishing local testing centres, planning support to 
national, devolved and local government, and constructing the 
emergency Nightingale hospitals. 
• Support in response to events not necessarily defined as a risk in 
the National Risk Register,1 such as providing liaison, planning and 
logistic expertise to the civil authorities in the run-up to, and following, 
the UK’s exit from the European Union in 2020. 
1.3. MACA applies to operations conducted within the UK, its territorial waters 
and/or the exclusive economic zone, and the Crown Dependencies. Other 
government departments, Crown Dependencies and/or civil authorities may 
request MACA. Assistance is authorised in accordance with this publication 
and the powers to deploy Service personnel derive from the Royal Prerogative, 
the Emergency Powers Act 1964 or emergency regulations made under the 
Civil Contingencies Act 2004 (CCA 04) depending on the nature and location of 
the task required. Operations to support Overseas Territories are not classified 
as MACA and are not covered by this publication. 
1.4. Routinely, MACA requests will require ministerial authorisation, but in the 
event of a significant incident where there is an urgent requirement to save 
lives, alleviate distress and/or protect significant property, a local commander 
is empowered to lawfully conduct civilian tasks to address the situation without 
prior recourse either to ministerial authority or their own chain of command.2 As 
soon as practicably possible, the chain of command should be informed of the 
decision and response. For the most significant and wide-ranging disruptive 
challenges, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, military joint commanders may 
be given delegated authority to undertake specific tasks to support the local 
resilience forums (LRFs) and devolved equivalents.3 Staff should not assume 
devolved administrations/partners across government have the same approach 
to delegation of authority and may require more time to consult their chain of 
command.
1 The National Risk Register is explained further at paragraphs 1.5 and 1.19–1.20.
2 In accordance with the 17 January 1983 Standing Defence Council Order.
3 In Scotland, the roles of LRFs are undertaken by regional resilience partnerships 
(RRPs) and local resilience partnerships (LRPs). The equivalents in Northern Ireland are the 
emergency preparedness groups (EPGs).
4
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

Strategic background
1.5. The UK faces an increasing number of disruptive challenges. The 2020 
National Risk Register describes 38 risks, which are grouped into six broad 
areas: 
• environmental hazards; 
• human and animal health; 
• major accidents; 
• societal risks; 
• malicious attacks; and
• risks occurring overseas.
Lead government departments (LGDs) are responsible for managing risks 
assigned to their respective portfolios and for conducting the associated 
contingency planning and preparation. Some of these risks may be a 
consequence of malign actors operating below the threshold of war or, indeed, 
the threshold of attribution. Events within any one of these categories have the 
potential to overwhelm civil authorities and may result in a request for Defence 
support. Defence is not immune to these risks as many have the potential to 
disrupt Defence outputs. Consequently, this support may be provided whilst 
Defence is itself under stress.
5
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context
Our Armed Forces assisted the civil authorities for the London Olympic Games

1.6. Providing resilience within the UK is enshrined in the Integrated Review.4 
A resilient homeland is crucial to strengthening security at home and overseas; 
a UK that can withstand and recover quickly from disruption deters our 
adversaries by changing the risk to reward calculation.  
1.7. The CCA 04 provides the framework for civil protection.5 It describes 
how organisations, particularly sub-departmental agencies and local 
responders, prepare for and respond to disruptive challenges. The Act 
comprises two parts.
a. Part 1: Local arrangements for civil protection. Part 1 establishes 
a clear set of responsibilities and roles for practitioners involved in 
emergency preparation and response at the local level. The Act divides 
local responders into two categories, imposing different responsibilities 
on each.
 o Category 1 responders are organisations at the core of the 
response to most emergencies, for example, emergency 
services, local authorities and certain specified National Health 
Service (NHS) bodies.
 o Category 2 responders comprise cooperating bodies that are 
less likely to be intimately involved in planning work, but who 
would be involved in responding to incidents that affect their 
specific sector, for example, the Health and Safety Executive, 
transport and utility companies, and other elements of  
the NHS.6
b. Part 2: Emergency powers. Part 2 of the Act enables temporary 
special legislation (emergency regulations) to help deal with the most 
serious emergencies where existing legislation may inhibit the most 
4 Two of the four pillars of the Strategic Framework within this review directly apply 
resilience operations: strengthening security and defence at home and overseas; and 
building the UK’s national resilience.
5 The CCA 04 received Royal Assent on 18 November 2004, repealing the Civil Defence 
Act 1948 and the Civil Defence Act (Northern Ireland) 1950. The Act imposes duties on 
specified bodies with the aim of delivering a single framework for civil protection in the 
UK capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st Century. Since its inception, additional 
legislation has been enacted specific to the devolved administrations and this is referred to 
under ‘linkages’ in the preface.
6 Defence is neither a Category 1 nor Category 2 responder but should be fully involved 
with cooperating in emergency preparedness work in a supporting role. Civil Contingencies 
Act Enhancement Programme , March 2012, Chapter 2.
6
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

effective response. To date, it has not been necessary to use these 
powers. In response to large-scale events such as the COVID-19 
pandemic, when the government has the time and space to do so, it 
can enact scenario-specific legislation rather than enact Part 2 of the 
CCA 04. 
1.8. The strategic objectives that underpin the UK government’s response to 
a disruptive challenge are to:7
• protect human life and, as far as possible, property and the 
environment, and alleviate suffering;
• support the continuity of everyday activity and restore disrupted 
services at the earliest opportunity; and
• uphold the rule of law and the democratic process.
Whilst set at the strategic level, these objectives underpin the response at all 
levels.
 
The CCA 04 defines an emergency as: ‘an event or situation that 
threatens or causes serious damage to human welfare, the  
environment or security in the UK’. The definition covers a range of 
scenarios including adverse weather, severe flooding, animal and 
human-borne diseases, terrorist incidents and the impact of a disruption on 
essential services and infrastructure. Additionally, Cabinet Office guidance 
explains that to constitute an emergency, an incident or situation must also 
pose a considerable test for an organisation’s ability to perform its functions. 
The common themes of emergencies are: the scale of the impact of the 
event or situation; the demands it is likely to make on local responders; and 
the exceptional deployment of resources. To constitute an emergency, this 
event or situation must require the implementation of special arrangements 
by one or more Category 1 responders.8
7 Cabinet Office, Responding to Emergencies: the UK Central Government Response 
Concept of Operations, updated April 2013.
8 Cabinet Office, Guidance: Emergency preparedness , 2012. 
7
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

Devolved administrations
1.9. The devolved administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland all 
have different settlements. These settlements are complex but broadly these 
administrations have the following areas devolved:
• policing;9
• health and social care;
• education and training;
• local government and housing;
• agriculture, forestry and fisheries;
• the environment and planning;
• tourism, sport and heritage; and
• economic development and internal transport. 
Annexes 1A and 1B contains further details on the devolved administrations.
9 Non-counterterrorist policing is devolved in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Policing in 
Wales is not devolved.
8
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context
Our Armed Forces can assist in emergencies across all UK nations

Emergency management framework
1.10. The UK government employs a fused, interagency approach to ensure 
its response to a disruptive challenge is integrated across government.10 This 
approach coheres state apparatus from central government, the devolved 
administrations, partners (for example, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency), 
LRFs and equivalents and, where necessary, the commercial, civil and 
voluntary sectors. The Cabinet Office applies a set of planning principles 
entitled Integrated Emergency Management, which is subdivided into six 
activity areas: 
• anticipation (horizon scanning);
• assessment (of the risks);
• prevention (pre-event actions);
• preparation (development of contingency plans);
• response (to an event to protect life, contain and mitigate the impacts 
of the emergency and create the conditions for a return to normality); 
and
• recovery (longer-term activity of rebuilding, restoring and rehabilitating 
the community).
Comprehensive details for all six areas are contained in Emergency 
Preparedness.11 However, the most relevant to Defence are expanded upon 
below.
1.11. Preparation. The Home Secretary has overall responsibility for the 
safety and security of the UK population.12 In parallel, ministers from LGDs are 
responsible for contingency planning and response within their own specific 
areas. The Cabinet Office assumes overall responsibility for cross-government 
resilience preparedness and response capability.
a. The Civil Contingencies Secretariat (CCS) provides the coordinating 
function for contingency and resilience planning. It is responsible for 
10 See JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine.
11 For more information see Cabinet Office, Guidance: Emergency preparedness , 2012.
12 Specific responsibilities for safety and security are devolved to LGDs.
9
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

ensuring a resilient and secure UK by improving the nation’s ability to 
absorb, respond to, and recover from potentially disruptive challenges. 
Underpinning preparations, the CCS employs the Integrated Emergency 
Management approach. Devolved administrations are responsible 
for coordinating many aspects of resilience within their respective 
jurisdictions. To ensure a coherent approach they work closely both 
with the Cabinet Office and through their respective departments of 
state.13 The UK government retains responsibility for coordinating the 
response to events where powers have been reserved, whilst devolved 
administrations will assume the lead in responding to events within their 
areas of jurisdiction that have been devolved.14 Within England, the 
Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities (DLUHC) has 
responsibility for community resilience. Community resilience describes 
the use of local resources and knowledge to assist the civil authorities in 
the event of a regional or local-level disruptive challenge. 
b. At the local level, resilience planning and preparation is coordinated 
on a multi-agency basis by the LRF. These comprise Category 1 and 
Category 2 responders. Other agencies, including Defence and the 
voluntary sector, are invited to attend where appropriate.
c. The Crown Dependencies are not part of the UK and are not 
subject to, or bound by, CCA 04.15 In the event that Defence assets are 
requested by a Crown Dependency, this will be coordinated through the 
Ministry of Justice acting as the LGD.
1.12. Response. In response to a significant disruptive challenge within 
the UK, a range of different organisations and partners have a role to play in 
coordinating the response. This inter-agency approach is coordinated using 
the following mechanisms.
13 The Scotland Office, the Wales Office and the Northern Ireland Office.
14 An example of where powers are reserved to Westminster is during the response to a 
terrorist incident.
15 Managing an emergency in, or affecting, the Crown Dependencies of the Channel 
Islands and Isle of Man is a matter for their governments, with assistance being requested 
in the first instance through the agreements and arrangements already in place.
10
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

a. Central response framework. When faced with such a situation 
a central government response mechanism is initiated.16 At the heart 
of this response is the activation of the UK’s ad hoc emergency 
sub-Cabinet Committee: the Cabinet Office Briefing Room (Ministerial) 
(COBR (M)).17 The Prime Minister, Home Secretary or nominated senior 
minister will chair key COBR (M) meetings involving ministers and 
officials from relevant departments. This provides:
 o a senior decision-making body within government to oversee 
the response;
 o a forum able to draw upon specialist advice from sub-groups 
and/or subject matter experts as necessary;18 and
 o rapid coordination of the central government response 
supported by effective decision-making.
COBR (M) is subordinated by COBR (Officials).
b. Lead government department. Within central government, when 
responding to a disruptive challenge or when preparing for a major 
national event, a LGD19 is formally appointed if the lead department is 
not clear. The LGD has responsibility for:
 o assessing the situation;
16 The UK government categorises three levels of emergency of national significance. 
These are, in descending order of magnitude, catastrophic emergency (Level 3); serious 
emergency (Level 2); and significant emergency (Level 1). Below the national level there is 
a further category, local emergency, which is defined as: emergency with local impact, the 
response to which is conducted by local responders, where necessary in conjunction with 
local government. Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013. 
In the case of a catastrophic or serious emergency, central government will provide 
direction, whilst in a significant emergency, central government provides support and will 
nominate or confirm the LGD.
17 Within the devolved administrations, devolved responsibilities are coordinated through 
different mechanisms: in Northern Ireland it is the Crisis Management Group (Northern 
Ireland); in Scotland it is the Scottish Government Resilience Room (SGoRR); and in Wales 
it is through the Emergency Co-ordination Centre (Wales).
18 This might include the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE).
19 In Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013, a lead 
government department is defined as a: department of the United Kingdom government 
or devolved administration designated as responsible for overall management of the 
government response to an emergency or disaster. There are LGDs identified for both the 
response and recovery phases of emergencies.
11
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

 o ministerial briefings;
 o strategic communications, media and parliamentary interest; and
 o providing coherent policy and other support to local 
responders.20
c. Local response. Local responders, including agencies of national 
and devolved governments (for example, the Maritime and Coastguard 
Agency and National Highways), play a pivotal role in shaping a UK 
response. However, local responses may vary from what is laid down 
below. Planners should expect variations and occasional duplication 
between local, regional, devolved and national coordination chains. 
The local-level response is based upon the standing LRFs. However, in 
response to a disruptive challenge a strategic coordinating group (SCG) 
may be stood up to coordinate multi-agency activities. 
(1) LRFs are permanent multi-agency partnerships comprising 
representatives from local public services, including the emergency 
services, local authorities, the NHS, the Environment Agency (EA) 
and others. These agencies are known as Category 1 responders, 
as defined by the Civil Contingencies Act; as required, Category 2 
responders are invited to join.  
(2) SCGs are established on a temporary basis to take overall 
responsibility for the multi-agency management of an incident 
and establish a strategic framework within which local levels of 
command, control and coordination will be exercised. Its guiding 
objectives are to: protect and preserve life; contain the incident, 
mitigate and minimise its impacts, maintain critical infrastructure 
and essential services; create conditions for recovery; and promote 
restoration and improvement activity in the aftermath of an incident 
to return to the new normality. It will normally be the role of the 
police to coordinate activity with other organisations and chair the 
SCG. However, once an operation moves from response to the 
recovery phase it would be usual for the chair to pass to the local 
authority. The SCG does not have the collective authority to issue 
executive orders to individual responder agencies. Each agency 
retains its own command authority and defined responsibilities, 
20 The only time the Ministry of Defence (MOD) would act as the LGD in a civil context 
would be for the response to a Defence nuclear accident or emergency.
12
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

and exercises command of its own operations. In other types of 
emergency, for example, certain health or maritime scenarios, an 
agency other than the police may initiate and lead the group.
Emergency services (comprising police, fire and rescue, and ambulance 
service) are usually the first responders to arrive at the scene of an 
incident.21 They provide operational, tactical and strategic levels of 
command, control and coordination. The Joint Emergency Services 
Interoperability Principles (JESIP) provides coherent doctrine for the 
three emergency services and the Maritime and Coastguard Agency 
to enable effective joint working and shared situational awareness. An 
explanation of JESIP is in Annex 1C.
d. Levels of command. The emergency services order the levels 
of command, control and coordination in a multi-agency response 
from operational, tactical through to strategic in ascending order (this 
is different than Defence who refer to tactical, operational and then 
strategic). When working as single agencies, the civil authorities also 
refer to these as bronze, silver and gold commands.
e. Coordination structures. Upon the rapid onset of a disruptive 
challenge in a specific/limited geographic area, the emergency 
management framework is usually constructed from the bottom 
upwards. Subsequent escalation of the event, either in severity or 
geographical extent, or as situational awareness improves, may 
require operational-, tactical- and/or strategic-level coordination to be 
implemented. Certain situations may dictate that all three levels run in 
parallel, while other situations, such as wide area/slow onset disruptive 
challenges (for example, a pandemic) may see a response initiated by 
central government or by the sub-national or devolved administration. 
Cross-government procedures for responding to such events are 
articulated in the Cabinet Office’s Responding to Emergencies: the 
UK Central Government Response Concept of Operations.22 These 
procedures vary between agencies, so a multi-agency response to a 
disruptive challenge will require the integration of separate command 
structures, and crisis management arrangements, often with differing 
characteristics and cultures.
21 This is situation-dependent and may include organisations such as the Maritime and 
Coastguard Agency where appropriate.
22 Cabinet Office, Responding to Emergencies: the UK Central Government Response 
Concept of Operations, updated April 2013, Sections 4–5.
13
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

1.13. Recovery. The recovery phase is defined as: the process of rebuilding, 
restoring and rehabilitating the community following an emergency.23 The 
following should be noted about this phase.
a. Preparations for the recovery phase form an integral part of 
emergency management. Arrangements for the recovery phase will be 
considered in the early stages of a response.
b. Recovery will likely comprise a multi-level approach. Depending 
upon the scale of the disruptive challenge, activities may run 
concurrently at local, sub-national/devolved and/or national levels, and 
may involve central government, devolved administrations, partners, 
agencies and LRFs and equivalents.
c. In contrast with the response phase, the recovery phase is often 
protracted and may take many months or even years to support 
affected communities through reconstructing infrastructure and 
23 Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013.
14
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context
Our Armed Forces helped with the recovery phase following the Salisbury nerve agent attack

restoring emotional, social, economic and physical well-being.24 During 
events that cover a wide area, it is not uncommon for the recovery 
phase to have started in one area, while an adjacent area remains in the 
response phase.
Defence involvement
1.14. Direction. The Integrated Review reflects the UK government’s intent to 
establish a ‘whole-of-society’ approach to resilience. The Ministry of Defence 
(MOD) will contribute to this through the provision of MACA and strengthening 
security at home (including the Crown Dependencies).
1.15. Associated military operations. Defence activities occurring in the 
UK that support strategic and overseas tasks may fall under UK operations.25 
While these operations may not support the civil authorities directly, they do 
require close civil-military liaison and cooperation. Accordingly, such activities 
use many of the mechanisms and procedures associated with MACA, but they 
may not be classified as MACA and are covered in Chapter 3.
1.16. Responsibility. Across Defence, responsibility for resilience is provided 
at different military levels. The three levels are strategic, operational and tactical.
a. Strategic. The MOD’s Security Policy and Operations (SPO) 
Directorate, through the UK operations team, has strategic responsibility 
for any Defence contribution to prepare for and respond to civil 
emergencies.26
b. Operational. The Headquarters of the Standing Joint Command 
(United Kingdom) (HQ SJC(UK)) is the coordinating headquarters for all 
MACA at the operational level. It is assigned an area of responsibility 
for resilience operations in support of the civil authorities in the UK in a 
separate directive from the Chief of the Defence Staff. The HQ SJC(UK) 
area of responsibility includes the land mass of the UK and Crown 
24 Planners should consider a variety of human security factors when planning MACA 
support because disruptive events may affect particular communities, demographics 
and genders differently. Defence uses the term ‘human security’ to describe an 
audience-centric approach to planning that takes account of the human environment and 
the security of individuals and communities.
25 Examples include military support to the mounting of operations, host-nation support 
to foreign forces based in, or transiting through, the UK, and the nuclear emergency 
organisation.
26 The SPO Directorate works closely with the CCS and, when COBR is activated, will 
likely represent the MOD at that forum in its response to disruptive challenges in the UK.
15
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

Dependencies and most internal waters.27 HQ SJC(UK) will be notified 
of all MACA requests irrespective of whether in the maritime, land or 
air domains, but will pass those outside of its area of responsibility to 
the respective single-Service headquarters. Maritime operations in the 
UK marine area will be under the operational command of Commander 
Operations (COMOPS) in the Maritime Operations Centre (MOC) 
Responsibility for the area between the high and low water mark, 
and in estuaries, is deliberately undefined; tasks will be allocated to 
either HQ SJC(UK) or the MOC depending on the capability required. 
Air operations in UK airspace will generally be conducted under the 
operational command of the Air Defence Commander – Air Officer 
Commanding 11 Group (AOC 11 Gp). In certain circumstances, limited 
niche capabilities, such as finite medical resources or particular 
security-related tasks, may be retained within a separate command. 
c. Tactical. A network of regional points of command (RPoCs), based 
on British Army brigade and regional headquarters, and regional liaison 
officers from all three Services, often with deputies, 28 exercise tactical 
responsibility and provide the primary link between Defence and civil 
authorities at devolved administrations, sub-national and local levels. 
When operating in this capacity, British Army brigade and regional 
commanders are referred to as the joint military commander (JMC). 
However, there may be circumstances where another commander 
other than the RPoC commander may exercise the JMC role. Specialist 
commands may be employed outside the RPoC framework if there is 
a requirement for a specific capability, for example, a Royal Air Force 
(RAF) JMC may be appointed where specific air expertise is required, 
or an engineer brigade for a role involving construction or demolition. 
Consideration should be given to protecting these specialist commands 
from generalist tasks if it is likely that their niche capabilities will be 
required in the near future.29  
27 Certain internal waters, such as the Minches, remain the responsibility of the Fleet 
Commander.
28 The network of regional liaison officers comprises: joint regional liaison officers 
(JRLOs) (also representing the British Army); Royal Navy regional liaison officers (RNRLOs); 
and Royal Air Force regional liaison officers (RAFRLOs).
29 Commander 8 Engineer Brigade was appointed as the JMC in 2020 for community 
testing in Liverpool during the COVID-19 response. The station commander RAF Honington 
was appointed JMC in 2016 in support of a Suffolk Constabulary operation in response to 
a missing airman from that station.
16
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

Section 2 – The UK operating 
environment
Situation
1.17. Defence will support LGDs and civil authorities in accordance with 
the MACA principles. However, other factors may serve to compound the 
resilience challenges facing the UK government.
a. The UK population is forecast to grow to 70 million by 2027 and its 
average age is increasing. This will see increased demand on national 
infrastructure (housing, transport and utilities) and public services 
(health, education and social services). As a result, excess capacity 
may be reduced or lost altogether for national infrastructure and 
public services to be able to respond to, or provide support during, a 
disruptive challenge.
b. The UK government and the commercial sector are jointly 
responsible for delivering the UK’s critical national infrastructure.30 
Notwithstanding the contractual obligation to ensure business 
continuity, the UK government is the ultimate guarantor in the event of 
any failure of critical national infrastructure.
c. Since 2015, the Defence estate has been further rationalised, with 
more units in larger, but fewer, UK bases. This has resulted in a reduced 
military footprint across the UK. Consequently, some units may need 
to travel further to reach any emergency. Once deployed, units may 
have less estate and infrastructure nearby on which to rely for support. 
Likewise, it has reduced options for Defence estate to be used by civil 
authorities for other purposes, such as for establishing rest centres or 
for the storage or forward-basing of stores.
d. Frequent severe weather events are likely to continue to impact 
the UK. These have the potential to cause widespread local and even 
regional disruption, damage and injury that will test local responders’ 
capacity and capability.
30 The Centre for Protection of Critical Infrastructure  details 13 critical sectors: civil nuclear; 
communications; defence; energy; emergency services; finance; food; government; 
hazardous chemicals; health; space; transport; and water and sewage.
17
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

e. Terrorist attacks in the UK, including on shipping and critical 
national infrastructure in the exclusive economic zone, are assessed 
as highly likely, whether executed by foreign or UK-based extremists. 
Government departments play a key role in deterring future terrorist 
threats and, in the event of an attack, the Home Office has the lead 
to respond to any attacks. Recovery and rebuilding public confidence 
would be a cross-government effort. 
f. The increasingly interdependent nature of technology and 
infrastructure creates the potential for complex scenarios that are likely 
to challenge the capabilities of conventional emergency responders. 
The rapid onset of events may compromise the delivery of essential 
services. As a result, Defence should be prepared to respond to 
a range of circumstances, including attacks on critical national 
infrastructure and against its own digital capabilities.
g. The media and influencers on social media can rapidly shape 
public opinion. In the face of crises, the UK government will quickly 
come under pressure from these to act. The pervasive nature of the 
media raises expectations and increases scrutiny. Defence may come 
under pressure to provide a contribution and, following any deployment, 
military personnel will be highly visible.
h. The rules-based international order is increasingly challenged by 
states and non-state actors who seek to destabilise and delegitimise 
it for their own interests. This activity, aimed at undermining the UK’s 
national security, can manifest in many ways. Events such as the 
Russian use of a military-grade nerve agent in Salisbury in 2018 is an 
example of this.
Boundaries
1.18. Operations conducted outside the exclusive economic zone of the 
UK or Crown Dependencies is not classed as MACA. The UK maritime 
area is determined by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS). This system divides the sea into a series of zones, as shown in 
Figure 1.1. The UK’s authority, both in terms of law and capacity, diminishes in 
each zone as distance from the land increases.
18
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

Figure 1.1 – Maritime zones
Section 3 – Risks
1.19. Not all disruptive challenges are foreseeable. However, for those 
that are, the UK government’s aim is to identify and mitigate the risk as far 
in advance as possible. To assist this the government produces a biennial 
National Security Risk Assessment. This is a classified assessment of the 
potential risks facing the UK over a five-year period. An unclassified version of 
the National Security Risk Assessment, known as the National Risk Register, is 
produced for public release.31
1.20. The National Risk Register considers the likelihood of a risk, assessing 
the consequence and likelihood to determine the impact, should the risk 
materialise. The resultant outcome produces a risk and a subsequent risk 
assessment allowing individual risks to be categorised and prioritised. 32 This 
enables appropriate action to be taken and/or the allocation of resources to 
eliminate, reduce or mitigate the effects of a risk, or reduce the probability of a 
risk materialising. Continuous horizon scanning allows risk to be reviewed and, 
if significant change is identified, revised.  
31 HM Government, National Risk Register, 2020 Edition.
32 Risk is defined as: measure of the significance of a potential emergency in terms of its 
assessed likelihood and impact.  Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, 
February 2013.
200 nm
exclusive economic zone
12 nm
territorial 
sea
contiguous 
zone
continental shelf
mainland
high sea
deep seabedcontinental rise
continental 
slope
Note. In some areas the continental 
shelf, slope or rise may extend beyond 
the 200 nautical mile (nm) exclusive 
economic zone. 
12 nm
baseline
19
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

 
Key points
• The UK government has developed, and significantly improved, the nation’s 
civil response capability following a series of challenging resilience events 
during the early 21st Century.
• Defence plays a supporting role by providing specialist capabilities and 
more generalist personnel support when: the civil authorities’ capacity/
capability is overwhelmed by an incident; directed to do so; or preparing for 
major national events.
• Other government departments or civil authorities can request Defence 
assistance through the MACA process.
• The CCA 04 provides the framework for civil protection.
• The UK government employs an integrated approach to a crisis or 
emergency response.
• The Cabinet Office assumes overall responsibility for cross-government 
resilience preparedness and response capability.
• During an emergency, or when preparing for a major national event, a single 
LGD is usually appointed.
• Defence is no longer viewed as the ‘last resort’ option; rather, it is 
increasingly seen as supporting the LGD and providing support where it is 
appropriate for it to do so.
• The National Risk Register considers the likelihood of a risk occurring, 
assessing this against a number of consequences to determine the impact 
should it materialise.
20
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1
Context

Annex 1A 
Devolved administrations
1A.1. The following annex details the key areas of devolved responsibility, 
the legislative underpinning and the regional variances in organisation. The 
annex is not exhaustive and planners should establish an early dialogue with 
regional subject matter experts. The UK government is responsible for the core 
legislation concerning resilience: the CCA 04. All the devolved administrations 
have been delegated elements of this legislation to deliver. 
Scotland
1A.2. General. In Scotland, the Scottish Government and the First Minister 
deliver the executive function as the LGD for Scottish responsibilities devolved 
to Scotland. When delivering MACA in support of a devolved function, 
approval must be sought through an appropriately senior civil servant in the 
Scottish Government; generally this is the chief executive officer of a Scottish 
government agency and could range from Director Local Government (which 
includes Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, Police Scotland and the Scottish 
Ambulance Service), Director General NHS Scotland, Chief Executive Officer 
Scottish Environment Protection Agency or the Chief Medical Officer. 
1A.3. Legislation. Part 1 of CCA 04 is delegated to the Scottish Government 
to deliver, with the First Minister having executive powers to enforce 
preparedness requirements in devolved areas. The Scottish Government and 
the First Minister oversee the response phase for those areas of responsibility 
devolved to the Scottish Government. This response is conducted alongside 
other government departments covering non-devolved areas. 
1A.4. Devolved areas of responsibility. The Scotland Act 1998 provided the 
transfer of certain functional areas from the UK government to the Scottish 
Government. Therefore, Scottish Government ministers now exercise most 
executive and subordinate legislative powers in relation to local government, 
and this includes in the preparedness and response to civil contingency 
events. 
1A.5. Process. For ‘bottom up’ requests, the civil authority requiring support 
should initially staff requests through their own agency and local resilience 
21
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1A
Context

partnership (LRP) to ascertain the availability of mutual aid, and then through 
the SCG, if activated, to identify whether mutual aid, third sector or commercial 
resources are available (or combination of such avenues). When processing 
the MACA request, the relevant department in the Scottish Government 
should work with a Defence regional liaison officers (RLOs) to develop the 
MACA request, which would then be channelled through the Scotland Office 
in London for endorsement. In common with other devolved administrations, 
the Scottish Government cannot request MACA support directly from the 
MOD. They must approach the relevant UK territorial department to submit on 
their behalf. The LGD principle remains, and the MOD will expect to receive 
MACA requests from the Scotland Office rather than directly from the Scottish 
Government. 
1A.6. Request format. Requests must be in written form and authorised by 
a senior representative of the requesting civil authority. The request format 
must contain the name of the requesting organisation, which organisation 
will be accepting financial liability, and as much detail as possible on the 
nature of the desired effect. RLOs and the government liaison officer should 
be consulted when compiling the request. In parallel, the MACA request is 
staffed by HQ SJC(UK) in accordance with the standing MACA process. 
Exceptions exist depending on the delegated authority related to MACA, such 
as those involving the use of Defence estate and/or for specific UK operations. 
In addition, whilst there is no formal devolved MACA funding agreement in 
Scotland between the Scottish Government and devolved agencies, the 
model used is similar to that used in England where the Scottish Government 
meets costs as required, and then claims back funds from the civil authority as 
appropriate. 
Wales
1A .7. General. In Wales, the Welsh Government and the First Minister deliver 
the executive function as the LGD for Wales for responsibilities devolved to 
Wales. When delivering MACA in support of a devolved function, approval 
must be sought through an appropriately senior civil servant in the Welsh 
Government; generally this is the chief executive officer of a Welsh government 
agency and could range from Director Local Government (which includes fire 
and rescue services), Director General NHS Wales, Chief Executive Officer 
Natural Resources Wales or the Chief Veterinary Office for Wales.
22
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1A
Context

1A.8. Legislation. Part 1 of CCA 04 is delegated to the Welsh Government, 
with the First Minister for Wales having executive powers to enforce 
preparedness requirements in devolved areas. The Welsh Government and 
the First Minister oversee the response phase for those areas of responsibility 
devolved to the Welsh Government. This response is conducted alongside 
other government departments covering non-devolved areas. 
1A.9. Devolved areas of responsibility. The Government of Wales Act 1998 
provided the transfer of certain functional areas from the UK government 
to the Welsh Government. Therefore, Welsh Government ministers now 
exercise most executive and subordinate legislative powers in relation to 
local government; this includes in the preparedness and response to civil 
contingency events. 
1A.10. Process. For ‘bottom up’ requests, the civil authority requiring support 
should staff requests through their own agency to ascertain the availability of 
mutual aid, and then through the SCG, if activated, to identify whether mutual 
aid or commercial resources are available. The MACA request, if still required, 
should then be staffed through the civil authority ‘chain of command’ and, 
if the responsibility is devolved, this will be through the Civil Service lead up 
through to First Minister and then on to the Wales Office and potentially into 
the Cabinet Office for approval at UK ministerial level. In parallel with this, the 
MACA request is staffed by HQ SJC(UK), or for maritime operations COMOPS, 
in accordance with the standing MACA process. Exceptions exist depending 
on any Defence-delegated authority related to MACA, such as those involving 
the use of Defence estate and/or for specific UK operations. In addition, whilst 
there is no formal devolved MACA funding agreement in Wales between the 
Welsh Government and devolved agencies, the model used is similar to that 
used in England where the Welsh Government meets costs as required, and 
then claims back funds from the civil authority as appropriate. 
Northern Ireland
1A.11. General. Operational delivery of CCA 04 is undertaken at the regional 
Northern Ireland level by the eight autonomous devolved departments. These 
departments are centrally cohered by the Northern Ireland Executive Office in 
the Northern Ireland Hub.
23
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1A
Context

Operating framework
1A.12. Civil Contingencies Group. The Civil Contingencies Group (Northern 
Ireland) (CCG (NI)) is a strategic leaders’ forum, focused on developing policy 
and legislation. The group is made up of eight departmental permanent 
secretaries and senior officials from the Executive Office, Northern Ireland 
Office (NIO) and Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI). Depending on the 
timeline for implementation, CCG (NI) will either be at official or ministerial level, 
and it can plug directly into the COBR if appropriate.
1A.13. Northern Ireland Hub. The Northern Ireland Hub, within the Northern 
Ireland Executive Office’s Civil Contingencies Division (CCD), seeks to 
identify emerging crises at range, affording the eight autonomous devolved 
departments time and space to collaborate and provide collegiate solutions. 
The central message of the Northern Ireland Hub is one of crisis avoidance, 
rather than emergency response. Through sustained contact with various 
civil contingency-focused issues, the Hub will understand departments’ 
areas of risk and points of friction, allowing CCD to oversee and coordinate 
comprehensive exercising and training schedules, assuring core resilience and 
preparedness.
1A.14. Strategic coordinating group. The SCG remains a core feature of 
regional response to disruptive challenges as it is across the UK, responding 
to immediate, unforeseen events or superseding the Northern Ireland Hub 
as a regional crisis escalates across two or more departmental boundaries. 
Note that there is currently no Northern Ireland legislation that can compel a 
department, or its key staff, to chair an SCG.
1A.15. Emergency preparedness groups. Northern Ireland is split into 
three civil contingency-focused areas, based on three policing regions: north, 
south and Belfast. Each has a local government-led emergency preparedness 
group (EPG), within which all partner emergency responders and devolved 
department operational staff are part. The EPG is the constant, operationally 
engaged body that feeds direct to the Northern Ireland Hub, allowing the Hub 
to accurately horizon scan and build a credible picture of risk and resilience 
across the three EPGs.
1A.16. Northern Ireland Emergency Preparedness Group.  The Northern 
Ireland Emergency Preparedness Group is the central, connected and 
strategically significant forum that is the connective tissue between the 
Northern Ireland Executive Office (Northern Ireland Hub) and the local level 
24
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1A
Context

EPGs. Co-chaired by a PSNI assistant chief constable and a rotating (annually) 
council chief executive, it delivers cohered, relevant and politically perceptive 
information packages to the Northern Ireland Hub to expedite and inform 
strategic decision-making. This forum can operate at the level of an SCG if 
a lead government department cannot chair the SCG or generate sufficient 
resource for one.
1A .17. Departmental operations cell. The departmental operations cell 
(DOC) is the reactive, operational arm of a devolved department. The DOC 
is designed to communicate directly with the Northern Ireland Hub, or if 
activated, the SCG.
Military aid to the civil authorities
1A.18. Process. Devolved departments are entitled to engage with 38 (Irish) 
Brigade directly to shape a MACA request but they will usually inform 
the Office of the First and Deputy First Ministers before making a formal 
submission, in order that cross-party assent might be gained. The NIO in 
London acts as the final signatory to ensure that appropriate political and 
security provisions have been made and mitigations put in place where 
appropriate, and that the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is primed to 
comment on any perceived or potential negative messaging about regional 
military activity. 
1A.19. Delivery. Whilst complexity remains, Defence remains a trusted 
partner within the Northern Ireland civil contingencies framework. Commander 
38 (Irish) Brigade’s contribution is engrained permanently within the Northern 
Ireland Hub structure, routinely engaging in exercising and training to prepare 
and instil core resilience. Within the 2021 Building Resilience Together: 
Northern Ireland Civil Contingencies Framework , JMC Northern Ireland 
(JMC NI) continues to major on the ‘prepare’ element, through subtle and 
focused engagement at the strategic-operational level. Sustained JMC NI input 
to this regional framework has helped to place Defence resources in a more 
appropriate, apolitical space, within reach of all communities, for universal 
benefit.
25
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1A
Context

Annex 1B
Lead government 
departments and agencies 
across the devolved 
administrations  
1B.1. The following table shows which departments and agencies are responsible for 
different policy areas.
Policy area
Department or organisation responsible and regional variation
England Wales Scotland Northern 
Ireland
Culture and 
sport
Digital, Culture, 
Media and 
Sport (DCMS)
Welsh 
Government
Cabinet Secretary 
Health and Sport
Department for 
Communities
Border control Home Office (Border Force)
Cyber defence Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO)
Defence Ministry of Defence (MOD)
Digital DCMS
Economic 
development
Her Majesty’s 
(HM) Treasury
Welsh 
Government 
(where 
delegated)
Cabinet Secretary 
Economy Fair Work 
and Culture
Department for 
the Economy
Education Department for 
Education (DfE)
Welsh 
Government
Cabinet Secretary 
Education DfE
Electromagnetic 
spectrum DCMS and the Office of Communications (Ofcom)
Energy (including 
nuclear safety) Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS)
Environment 
(flooding, 
agriculture, 
fisheries, animal 
welfare)
Department 
for the 
Environment, 
Food and Rural 
Affairs (Defra)
Welsh 
Government 
and Natural 
Resources 
Wales
Scottish 
Environmental 
Protection Agency
Department 
of Agriculture, 
Environment 
and Rural Affairs
26
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1B
Context

Policy area
Department or organisation responsible and regional variation
England Wales Scotland Northern 
Ireland
Finance and 
taxation HM Treasury
HM Treasury 
(unless 
delegated)
Cabinet Secretary 
Finance
Department of 
Finance
Food standards Food Standards 
Agency
Food 
Standards 
Agency
Food Standards 
Scotland
Department 
of Agriculture, 
Environment 
and Rural Affairs
Foreign policy FCDO
Fire and rescue 
services Home Office Welsh 
Government
Scottish Fire and 
Rescue Service
Department of 
Health
Health and 
social care
Department 
for Health and 
Social Care 
(DHSC)
Welsh 
Government
Cabinet Secretary 
Health and Social 
Care
Department of 
Health
Health and 
safety Health and Safety Executive (HSE)
Housing 
and local 
government
Department for 
Levelling Up, 
Housing and 
Communities 
(DLUHC)
Welsh 
Government
Cabinet Secretary 
Communities and 
Local Government
Department for 
Communities
Policing Home Office Home Office Police Scotland Department of 
Justice
Prisons and 
probation 
services
Ministry of 
Justice (MoJ) MoJ Scottish Prison 
Service
Department of 
Justice
Public health Public Health 
England
Welsh 
Government 
and Public 
Health Wales
Public Health 
Scotland
Department of 
Health
Transport: 
general
Department for 
Transport
Welsh 
Government 
(where 
delegated)
Transport Scotland Department for 
Infrastructure
Transport: road Department for 
Transport
Welsh 
Government 
(where 
delegated)
Transport Scotland Department for 
Infrastructure
Transport: rail Department for Transport
Transport: air Department for Transport (Civil Aviation Authority)
27
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1B
Context

Annex 1C
Joint Emergency Services 
Interoperability Principles
1C.1. The JESIP was a two-year programme that reviewed the response 
to major national disruptive challenges and disasters.33 JESIP has produced 
joint doctrine that provides a common way for emergency services to work 
together.34 Its purpose is to provide emergency service commanders with 
a framework to help them to respond together more effectively. JESIP is 
nationally recognised with support from emergency service chief officers  
and the Home Office, Cabinet Office and the Department of Health and  
Social Care. 
1C.2. JESIP doctrine focuses on the interoperability of the three emergency 
services, whilst also acknowledging that response to a disruptive challenge is 
a multi-agency activity and the resolution of an emergency will usually involve 
collaboration with other Category 1 and Category 2 responders and partner 
organisations. JESIP doctrine is not a prescriptive set of rules, rather it aims to 
guide, explain and inform. Specifically, it provides guidance:
• on how responders should train and operate, by applying common 
terminology, principles and ways of working for passing information 
between services;
• on responders’ actions in a multi-agency working environment 
to achieve the interoperability necessary for a successful joint 
response; and
• for commanders, at the scene and elsewhere, on the actions 
they should undertake when responding to major and complex 
incidents.
33 Joint in the context of JESIP refers to national emergency responders. Distinct from 
the military definition which refers to activities where elements of at least two (military) 
Services participate.
34 Joint Doctrine: the interoperability framework , Edition 2, July 2016.
28
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1C
Context

The principles for joint working
1C.3. The need for interoperability between emergency services extends to 
other agencies that may be expected to operate with them, including the UK 
Armed Forces. Any contribution by Defence responders should be seen in 
a supporting role to the civil responders, who will have primacy throughout. 
Defence responders must be aware of the JESIP and will be expected to 
adhere to the procedures wherever possible. JESIP comprises five principles.
a. Collocation. Collocation of commanders is essential and allows 
those commanders to perform the functions of command, control and 
coordination, face-to-face, at a single and easily identifiable location, 
known as the forward command post. Defence personnel operating 
with civil authorities at all levels must be aware of both the use of the 
joint decision model and the civil authorities’ approach to operational 
record keeping and decision logging.35
b. Communication. During incidents with a multi-agency response, 
civil commanders will use emergency services’ interoperability 
talk-groups, especially when collocation proves challenging. To enable 
shared understanding, Defence responders need to be incorporated 
into the network. The mnemonic METHANE will be used over 
communications networks; responders will be expected to use this 
format as required when dealing with the civil authorities. METHANE 
is:
 o Major incident declared;
 o Exact location;
 o Type of incident;
 o Hazards present or suspected;
 o Access – routes that are safe to use;
 o Number of casualties; and
 o Emergency services present and those required.
35 The Joint Decision Model log template is available at the JESIP website.
29
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1C
Context

c. Coordination. One of the emergency services will generally take 
the lead role at an incident to ensure an effective response. Any 
Defence contribution will likely be in a supporting role. It is the duty 
of the commander of the military unit or Defence asset to identify 
themselves at the forward command post and establish effective 
coordination with the lead civil responder to ensure tasking is 
appropriate.
d. Joint understanding of risk. Commanders of civil emergency 
services will ensure the safety of responders by conducting a joint 
assessment of risk. This will include any Defence assets that are under 
the control of the civilian agencies. However, this does not absolve 
military commanders from their own assessment of the risks and, 
where necessary, military commanders must decide for themselves 
if the risks their personnel are exposed to are tolerable and as low 
as reasonably practicable. In the event of disagreement between the 
responsible military commander and the civilian commander on a 
risk-related matter, the military commander must inform the military 
chain of command at the first opportunity.
e. Shared situational awareness. Critical to success is a common 
understanding of the circumstances and immediate consequences 
of a disruptive challenge, together with an appreciation of available 
resources and capabilities of all response agencies. To achieve this 
the emergency services employ the IIMARCH briefing format, which 
stands for:36
 o Information; 
 o Intent; 
 o Method; 
 o Administration; 
 o Risk assessment; 
 o Communications; and 
 o Humanitarian issues.
36 The IIMARCH briefing template is available on the JESIP website under ‘templates’.
30
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1C
Context

1C.4. Joint decision model. The joint decision model is designed to bring 
together all available information and reconcile potentially differing priorities 
to make effective decisions together. The joint decision model is illustrated in 
Figure 1C.1.
Figure 1C.1 – The joint decision model 
1C.5. Joint organisational learning. Joint organisational learning provides 
emergency services and other responder agencies with a consistent and 
accountable mechanism to ensure lessons identified are acted upon and 
that they become lessons learned. Military units/personnel with an assigned 
MACA responsibility should participate in joint learning opportunities to 
enhance their awareness of the JESIP . Local emergency services liaison 
groups across the UK provide the ideal forum to exchange ideas and develop 
mutual understanding before they are likely to meet one another in a disruptive 
challenge situation. Regional resilience liaison officers from all three Services 
act as the interface with the civil authorities within boundaries to ensure that 
this occurs. 
Gather 
information and 
intelligence
Assess risks 
and develop 
a working 
strategy
Consider 
powers, 
policies and 
procedures
Identify 
options and 
contingencies
Take action 
and review what 
happened Working 
together,
saving lives, 
reducing 
harm
31
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
1C
Context

[Page 46: No extractable text]

Chapter 2 outlines the Ministry of Defence’s policy for 
providing military aid to the civil authorities (MACA). It 
considers the legal basis for employing Defence resources 
on MACA tasks, and the charging policy applied to other 
government departments and civil authorities making a 
MACA request.
Section 1 – Direction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Section 2 – Military aid to the civil authorities policy  . . 36
Section 3 – Legal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Section 4 – Charging policy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Annex 2A – Charging for military aid to the civil  
                   authorities activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
33
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 2

Bolstering UK resilience is a key 
priority for the Prime Minister and this 
Government, to protect the people 
of the UK and our democracy. 
Resilience, at all levels of society, is 
more important than ever.
 
Paymaster General Speech on National 
Resilience Strategy, delivered on 13 July 2021 
 
”
“
34
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Chapter 2
Policy: ends
Section 1 – Direction
2.1. The UK government’s policy for using Defence to support activities in 
the UK is derived from the Integrated Review and the Defence Command 
Paper. The Integrated Review describes a strategic framework that include four 
elements:
• sustaining strategic advantage through science and technology;
• shaping the open international order of the future;
• strengthening security and defence at home and overseas; and
• building resilience at home and overseas.
2.2. Defence supports the civil authorities in ensuring resilience in the UK 
through either augmentation and/or providing specific capabilities. Enduring 
contributions are generally limited to only those where:
• it is unreasonable or unrealistic to expect the civil authorities to 
develop their own capabilities; or
• delivering the capability offers significant and demonstrable benefit 
for Defence.
The above points are not applicable to military aid to the civil authorities 
(MACA) tasks relating to industrial action or the undertaking of activity in 
support of service level agreements. Defence activities are anchored in 
a ‘whole-of-government’ or fused approach in support of wider national 
objectives.
2.3. There is a distinction between defending the UK from external military 
threats and responding to the internal and domestic risks identified in 
the National Risk Register. The Ministry of Defence (MOD) will act as lead 
government department (LGD) for defending the UK from any external military 
threat, with other government departments acting in a supporting role. 
Conversely, Defence will routinely act in a supporting role to other departments 
in responding to internal and domestic resilience and security challenges.
35
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Section 2 – Military aid to the civil 
authorities policy
2.4. Policy. MACA policy supports the government’s intent to provide an 
effective response to all types of emergencies and major crises at national, 
devolved, sub-national and local levels. This means having a pre-planned, 
integrated and coordinated response from the emergency services, civil 
authorities and, where appropriate, the MOD. If there is a disruptive challenge 
or similar crisis in the UK, local emergency services provide the first 
response; should circumstances necessitate it, government departments 
or civil authorities may then seek to request military assistance as part of 
their coordinated multi-agency response to augment local responders. The 
contribution of Defence reinforces national resilience by providing Defence 
capacity, capability and resources to assist in the planning, response and 
recovery of a wide range of disruptive events.
2.5. Policy criteria. The provision of Defence assistance is governed by four 
principles. MACA may be authorised when:
• there is a definite need to act and the tasks our Armed Forces are 
being asked to perform are clear;
• other options, including mutual aid, commercial alternatives and the 
voluntary sector,37 have been discounted;38 and either
• the civil authority lacks the necessary capability to fulfil the task and it is 
unreasonable or prohibitively expensive to expect it to develop one; or
• the civil authority has all or some capability or capacity, but it may not 
be available immediately, or to the required scale, and the urgency of 
the task requires rapid external support from the MOD.
In exceptional circumstances Defence ministers can choose to temporarily 
waive these criteria. This may happen when there are major events of national 
and international importance, or an event that is catastrophic, or potentially so, 
in nature. Equally, in some cases intervention may be required earlier than the 
37 The degree to which the voluntary sector can assist, and that this help can be 
guaranteed will be considered by Defence within the MACA request.
38 Usually verified by the joint or single-Service regional liaison officer for requests 
received from the civil authorities at the sub-national level, usually in consultation with the 
government liaison officer and strategic coordinating group chair.
36
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

criteria indicate to reduce the risk of events deteriorating and/or to reduce the 
scale of any subsequent Defence support. 
2.6. Ministerial authorisation. Ministerial authority must be sought for any 
request for Defence resources under MACA.39 Departments should note the 
following.
a. Departments requesting Defence assistance will require their own 
minister’s endorsement. In addition, the requesting department or 
devolved government must accept the financial costs as calculated by 
MOD and, if required, indemnify the MOD.
b. If a request for Defence assistance is made through a Cabinet Office 
Briefing Room (Ministerial) (COBR (M)) meeting in response to a disruptive 
challenge, there is no requirement for a separate ministerial request by the 
government department needing Defence support, providing a Defence 
minister is present to accept the request. Where necessary, agreement 
from the LGD to meet costs and indemnify MOD is still required. Moreover, 
a written request will still be required from the LGD so that all parties are 
clear on the nature of the assistance effect that has been requested.
39 Except for circumstances of an urgent nature where there is an imminent threat to life, a 
need to alleviate distress or to protect significant property, and requests to use Defence estate 
that are not contentious, or under other circumstances where authority has been delegated.
37
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends
There must be a definite need and clear tasks for our Armed Forces to perform

Operation Shaku: the Defence contribution to flood relief efforts 
across the north of England following Storms Desmond and 
Eva, December 2015 to January 2016
Following the widespread disruption and damage caused by Storms 
Desmond and Eva, Defence was asked to assist with recovery efforts to 
survey and clear roads in Cumbria. Whilst there were commercial options 
available to Cumbria County Council for this type of activity, the number of 
roads that needed assessment, and in some cases the remote nature of the 
area, was beyond the capacity and capability of the commercial sector in 
the region at that time. Under pressure to return the area affected to normal 
business as quickly as possible, Cumbria Strategic Coordinating Group 
requested Defence assistance to support the recovery effort once the initial 
storm had eased. Under MACA, military engineers were deployed to survey 
routes, assess the level of damage to the road network and in some areas to 
clear debris and reopen key routes through Cumbria. 
2.7. Central government intent. Defence can expect to become involved in 
both planning and preparation at a preparatory stage, and in recovery phase 
tasks, in addition to responding to disruptive challenges when they occur. 
This level of engagement between Defence and the civil authorities reflects 
central government’s intent to use the full range of tools at its disposal to deal 
with crises and return to ‘business as usual’ as quickly as possible. Under this 
wider range of tasks, the MOD may be called upon to assist civil authorities 
with:
• planning – collaborative planning using military campaign tools to 
build capability and capacity;
• training – awareness of the MACA process, contingency planning 
and crisis management; and
• enhancement – broadening the contribution of Defence in 
contingency planning for low-to-medium likelihood/high impact 
events.
2.8. Defence position on providing military aid to the civil authorities. The 
Defence contribution to resilience is normally provided by the UK Armed 
Forces through spare capacity, so it is subject to the availability of resources. 
However, increasingly the provision of MACA activity comes at the expense of 
38
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

a Defence output. Where a request for Defence support is likely to conflict with 
the Department’s ability to deliver its core outputs, advice on prioritisation will 
be given to ministers by Deputy Chief of the Defence Staff (Military Strategy 
and Operations) in consultation with Director General Security Policy. The MOD 
does not usually generate forces or hold equipment specifically for resilience 
tasks.40 This is because:
• the requirement is unpredictable in scale, duration and capability;
• Defence is often able to meet requirements from spare capacity; and
• it would involve using Defence’s budget to pay for other government 
departments’ responsibilities.
Section 3 – Legal
Principles
2.9. It is a principle of the UK’s democratic system of government that the 
UK Armed Forces remain under the control of central government and that 
Defence ministers are accountable publicly for the actions of our Armed 
Forces.
2.10. The command structure of the UK Armed Forces is a single chain, 
stretching from the Defence Council (chaired by the Secretary of State for 
Defence) exercising the Royal Prerogative to the individual units and Service 
personnel. Routinely, all Defence operations, including those conducted in the 
UK, require authorisation by Defence ministers through the Defence Council.
2.11. All MACA operations must be conducted within the law. Service 
personnel are subject to Service discipline (the Armed Forces Act 2006) and 
military command at all times. Failure to comply with the law may result in 
criminal charges against an individual and/or civil proceedings being brought 
against the MOD. Unlike the police, Service personnel only have the same 
powers of arrest as ordinary citizens; this may limit the breadth of their utility 
when supporting the police.
40 Exceptions might include providing air defence assets to counter a terrorist air threat 
and explosive ordnance disposal.
39
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Legal basis for military aid to the civil authorities deployments
2.12. There are three possible legal bases for a MACA deployment. These are:
• the Royal Prerogative for military tasks, where support is provided to 
complement civil authorities’ capabilities;
• a Defence Council Order under the Emergency Powers Act 1964 for 
tasks that are undertaken ordinarily by the civil authorities but where 
support has been requested for civilian tasks to replace capabilities 
provided by the civil authorities;41 or
• emergency regulations made under Part 2 of the Civil Contingencies 
Act 2004.
2.13. Service personnel can deploy under the Royal Prerogative for ‘military’ 
work. There is no legal definition or test for ‘military’ work, it is an assessment 
based on knowledge, experience and precedent. Indicators can include: 
where Service personnel have been trained for a specific role by the military; 
where Service personnel undertake that work as their ‘day job’; and/or work 
which has been seen traditionally as military activity. This type of work is 
requested usually, but not exclusively, by law enforcement agencies, most 
commonly the police, the Border Force and Her Majesty’s (HM) Revenue and 
Customs.
2.14. For non-military tasks, the mechanism of a Defence Council Order is 
used to authorise the deployment of Defence resources. A Defence Council 
Order is made using powers in Section 2 of the Emergency Powers Act 1964. 
The MOD’s Security Policy and Operations (SPO) Directorate is responsible for 
producing and issuing the Defence Council Order. Key points for the Defence 
Council Order include:
• it requires ministerial authorisation and should be signed by two 
members of the Defence Council on the same day;
• the work must be judged to be both urgent and of national 
importance; and
• the Defence Council provides governance and determines whether 
the task is of an urgent and nationally important nature.
41 Standing Defence Council Order, dated 17 January 1983, reflected in The Queen’s 
Regulations for the Army, J11.001-010, provides for a response to an immediate emergency 
where civil authority capability is not yet available.
40
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

2.15. There is one standing Defence Council Order, dated 17 January 1983, 
which supports activity in response to a disaster when there is an imminent 42 
threat to life, a need to alleviate distress or to protect significant property. In 
these circumstances, local commanders 43 may provide immediate assistance 
without recourse to higher authority. Commanders must note that activity 
undertaken under this Defence Council Order is restricted to responding to the 
disaster. The 1983 Defence Council Order approves the employment of military 
personnel on tasks:
However, as soon as is practicable after initiating a response, the local 
commander must inform the chain of command, with the chain of command 
ensuring that the Headquarters Standing Joint Command (United Kingdom) 
(HQ SJC(UK)) and the SPO Directorate is informed.
2.16. Devolved administrations must not request MACA directly from the 
MOD. Instead, requests must be channelled through the relevant UK territorial 
department (Northern Ireland, Scotland or Wales Offices) to submit on their 
behalf. MACA requests from the Crown Dependencies must be submitted by 
them to the Ministry of Justice in the first instance.
2.17. Routine liaison between Defence and the civil authorities at all levels, or 
providing military advice, does not require ministerial authority.44 Approval is 
provided on a standing basis by the MOD’s Head Operations (Military or Policy) 
42 In this context, ‘imminent’ means that there is no time either to consult the chain of 
command or conduct detailed operational planning.
43 The term ‘local commander’ is not defined in terms of rank. If the most senior person 
‘on the ground’ is a private soldier (or equivalent) then they are the local commander.
44 Usually advice will be provided by a military assessment team, the generation of which 
would be approved by the SPO Directorate.
‘as being urgent work of national importance, such work as is 
considered by the local commander, at the time when the work 
needs to be performed, to be urgently necessary for the purposes 
of the alleviation of distress and preservation and safeguarding of 
lives and property in time of disaster and do hereby authorise the 
temporary employment in such work of officers and men of Her 
Majesty’s Naval, Military or Air Forces, and specific tasks to be 
performed by officers and men of these forces assigned to that 
employment being such as may be specified by or under orders 
of the officers commanding the forces.’
“
41
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

or at the sub-national level by the British Army’s regional point of command 
(RPoC) commanders and single-Service equivalents. 45
2.18. Using military personnel armed with weapons for MACA operations will 
always be an exception. The Chief of the Defence Staff’s (CDS’s) Directive, or 
the SPO Directorate’s activation order, will state explicitly whether the use of 
personal weapons or specialist equipment is authorised and, if so, whether 
guidance cards and specific rules of engagement are to be applied.
Indemnity and insurance requirement
2.19. The SPO Directorate will prepare ministerial submissions for all MACA 
requests. This will include any requirement for legal indemnity,46 insurance 
and the position regarding providing military resources against commercial 
alternatives and the implications of state aid. The MOD may wish to be 
indemnified against potential claims arising from the assistance requested; in 
this case, MOD legal advisers will provide advice. Joint military commanders 
(JMCs) are to use RPoC or headquarter civil secretariats to manage charging 
and provide advice on relevant policy awareness.
Health, safety and environmental protection
2.20. The MOD is required to comply with the Secretary of State for 
Defence’s Health, Safety and Environmental Protection policy. When Crown 
exemptions apply, the MOD is under remit to produce internal policy guidance 
that, so far as is reasonably practicable, produces outcomes that correspond 
as closely as possible to legislative obligations.47 The Defence Safety Authority 
is responsible for regulating Defence health, safety and environmental 
protection.48 Commanders should seek advice through the relevant Defence 
Safety Authority branch where there are concerns regarding health, safety or 
environmental protection issues. The Defence Safety Authority also provides 
advice on duty holder responsibilities, risk assessment and risk management.
45 Sub-national liaison, undertaken primarily by regional liaison officers, does not require 
authorisation.
46 For ‘notice’ operations the MOD’s SPO Directorate will agree indemnity principles 
with the requesting government department. Usually such principles will be set out in any 
memorandum of understanding between the MOD and the requesting department.
47 MOD, Health, Safety and Environmental Protection in Defence: Policy Statement by 
the Secretary of State for Defence , 2 April 2020.
48 Defence Safety Authority, DSA01.1, Defence Policy for Health, Safety and 
Environmental Protection, August 2016.
42
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Personnel
2.21. The employment of minors (under the age of 18) and cadets on MACA 
tasks is strictly governed. The following guidance applies.
a. Regular and Reserve Forces. Regulars and Reservists who have 
not completed Phase 1 military training are not to deploy on MACA 
operations.
b. Ministry of Defence-sponsored cadet forces.  The MOD’s Chief 
of Defence People has issued a separate but complementary directive 
regarding the employment of cadet force adult volunteers and cadets, 
and the use of cadet facilities, on MACA operations.49 This direction is 
summarised below.
(1) Cadet force adult volunteers may volunteer their services if 
correctly trained and equipped for the task. In such an instance 
authority for any activity must be given by the appropriate Delivery 
Duty Holder before the activity takes place. 
49 Joint Service Publication (JSP) 814, Policy and Regulations for MOD Sponsored 
Cadet Forces, May 2019.
43
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends
The Defence Safety Authority also provides advice on duty holder responsibilities,  
risk assessment and risk management

(2) Infrastructure owned by the MOD can be provided as MACA. 
Bids for this infrastructure must be coordinated through the joint 
regional liaison officer and direct approaches to the site owner by 
the emergency service of local authority should be avoided. For 
non-MOD sites, it is for the owner of the site to grant permission. 
c. University cadets. University cadets50 may only be employed on 
MACA tasks where there is an imminent threat to life, a need to alleviate 
distress or to protect significant property if they are on duty at the time 
of the request.
d. Exchange personnel. Where personnel from other nations serve in 
units assigned to operations in the UK, guidance should be sought from 
the MOD’s SPO Directorate, through the chain of command, before 
such individuals are committed to operations.
e. National Health Service first responder co-responders.  Some 
National Health Service (NHS) ambulance services use personnel 
from Defence and other emergency services as co-responders to 
provide first response to medical emergencies in the local community. 
A small number of Service personnel volunteer as co-responders, with 
appropriate chain of command permission, to undertake the role during 
their off-duty time. These personnel could be the subject of a MACA 
request from NHS/ambulance trusts to enable them to be used on 
a full-time basis. A command and control element will be required to 
manage all such co-responder requests.
2.22. The Reserve Forces Act 1996 enables Reservists to support the 
Regular Forces on MACA tasks. Reservists are not used as part of the initial 
front line deployment during standing counterterrorist operations in support 
of the police, although they may be used in a follow-on capacity. However, 
such policy limitations do not apply to unit Full Time Reserve Service, and 
non-regular permanent staff personnel. In most instances, guidance should 
be sought from the UK operations team within the SPO Directorate whenever 
there is an intention to employ Reservists on MACA tasks.
50 University cadets refers to fully trained members of University Royal Navy Units, 
Officer Training Corps and University Air Squadrons.
44
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

2.23. Reservists attending for duty, including weekend training, can lawfully 
be diverted to provide support to emerging or ongoing MACA operations. The 
supporting period must not extend beyond their expected training/duty period 
unless the individual consents and this will require authorisation in line with 
broader MACA policy. An example of such support is a head of establishment 
authorising the employment of Reservists who volunteer (not a formal callout) 
for MACA tasks in circumstances such as responding to an adverse weather 
event. During the force generation of Reserve Forces several factors should be 
considered.
a. The generation of formed units of Reserves is much slower and 
more challenging than mobilising individual augmentees.
b. Before the cost of a Reserve capability can be passed on to 
the requesting department, certain force generation criteria have 
to be met; principally Defence must demonstrate that the use of 
Reserves will protect key elements of the Regular Force committed to 
non-discretionary departmental activity. It may also be that Defence 
has exhausted a Regular capability, and that Reserves offer the only 
viable way to fulfil this MACA demand. 
c. Most Reserves Forces cannot be held at readiness for UK 
operations.
d. Reserve Forces may contain experience, skills and local 
knowledge that are not present in the Regular Forces.
2.24. Deploying Ministry of Defence civilians. The MOD may seek to deploy 
MOD civilians in response to a MACA request. The scope of this deployment 
can vary, from virtual support to another government department through to 
physical collocation with another department, agency or within the commercial 
sector. MOD civilians deployed in this manner will be exclusively volunteers and 
are unlikely to be held at a formal graduated readiness. MOD civilians provide 
several capabilities that may be required by civil authorities, including: financial, 
commercial and policy knowledge; scientific knowledge in defence-related 
fields, such as counter chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) 
and CBRN and explosives (CBRNe); technological solutions to emerging 
threats; communications; and space and cyber. 
45
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Section 4 – Charging policy
2.25. Context. HM Treasury rules direct that government departments 
must charge for services that do not form part of their funded tasks and that 
departments must not profit from activity carried out on behalf of another 
department.51 With a few exceptions, MACA activity is not funded within the 
MOD budget and is conducted on a repayment basis.
2.26. Financial principles. Four financial principles govern Defence 
assistance. These are:
• Defence funds are granted for Defence purposes;
• Defence assistance should, where necessary, be safeguarded 
against risks through appropriate indemnity, financial and insurance 
arrangements;
• Defence personnel must not be used as a cheaper alternative to, or 
in competition with, commercial firms; and
• the basis of any financial charge may vary according to the urgency 
and/or nature of the assistance to which it relates.
2.27 . Charging levels and mechanisms. There are three charging levels. 
These are:
• full costs;
• marginal costs; and
• zero costs.52
Guidance on the MOD’s charging principles are shown in Table 2.1. Additional 
operational-specific guidance will be given by Defence Resources.
51 Detail contained in ‘Managing Public Money’  updated May 2021.
52 More details can be found in Annex 2A.
46
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Description Activity/detail Cost recovery 
principle
Military liaison officer/
military liaison team 
assessment
Advice from the military liaison officer/
military liaison team to civil authorities on 
the military capabilities and resources 
available to support an emergency 
response.
Zero cost
Military assessment 
team53 
Advice from a small military assessment 
team to civil authorities on the military 
capabilities and resources available that 
might complement a civil authority’s 
response to a disruptive challenge
Zero cost
Imminent threat to life, 
where there is a need 
to alleviate distress 
or a need to protect 
significant property
Immediate military intervention to prevent 
the loss of life and/or alleviate distress or a 
need to protect significant property.
Zero cost
Military planner support Distinct from the provision of liaison, 
Defence may provide, on request, 
planners to assist civil authorities at all 
levels with the formulation, execution and 
testing of their plans.
Marginal cost
Defence response The deployed Defence resource, carrying 
out agreed activities at the request of 
the civilian authorities in response to an 
emerging or ongoing disruptive challenge.
Marginal cost is predicated on the request 
for support being made by a strategic 
coordinating group (or equivalent) in 
response to a disruptive challenge. At the 
point at which civil authorities transition 
from ‘response’ to ‘recovery’ the charging 
mechanism will revert usually to full cost 
recovery. 
Marginal cost
Full cost
53 Military assessment teams usually have no standard structure or are not held at readiness. 
The sole exception to this is the Infrastructure Response Force held at readiness by 170 Engineer 
Group in Chilwell.
47
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Description Activity/detail Cost recovery 
principle
Planned support Events not linked to a disruptive challenge, 
or where Defence is requested to support 
longer-term activities, will attract full 
cost recovery. Non-emergency, planned 
routine support will continue to be 
charged in full, unless MOD judges that 
there is a Defence benefit which offsets 
the cost.
Full cost
Training and exercising Participation in relevant training or 
exercising at local resilience forum level,  
or above, may be provided at up-to 
marginal cost, proportionate to the 
activities/resources used. This is often 
at zero cost (military liaison officer 
participation, for example) but deployed 
troops on a field exercise may bring 
marginal cost.
Zero – 
marginal cost
Exceptional 
circumstances
The UK government meets the full cost of 
a response in exceptional circumstances; 
this is at ministerial direction.
Discretionary
Table 2.1 – Military aid to the civil authorities charging mechanism
2.28. Financial responsibility. Personnel dealing with requests for Defence 
assistance should be aware of:
• the financial principles likely to be applied;
• where applicable, the requirement in principle for indemnity and 
insurance cover; and
• the financial implications of conducting the activity.
Civil secretariats should be used to provide authoritative costings. Estimated 
costs should be provided to the requesting department at the first practical 
opportunity. 
2.29. Charging policy changes. The charging policy may change during a 
MACA operation. Marginal costs are likely to be applied in the early, dynamic 
stages of a response to a disruptive challenge, increasing to full costs levied 
during the recovery phase due to protracted Defence involvement and the 
48
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

resulting impact on MOD primary output. When it is in the national interest, 
Defence ministers may agree to reduce or waive costs.54 
Operation Prismed: October 2014 to January 2015
In late 2014, several trade unions with extensive representation in the health 
service secured a mandate for industrial action. To maintain normal services, 
health authorities across England put in place plans to mitigate the impact of 
the industrial action, including a request for Defence assistance.
Different circumstances across the country meant that the scale and type 
of support required of Defence varied between trusts with, at one extreme, 
a large requirement from the London Ambulance Service and, at the other, 
some ambulance trusts requiring no support at all. A consolidated request 
for Defence assistance was submitted by the Department of Health, and 
subsequently authorised by the MOD. HQ SJC(UK) developed a nationwide 
plan, which saw Defence successfully conduct Operation Prismed between 
October 2014 and January 2015, when the industrial action was cancelled. 
As this was a planned operation, the Defence contribution was charged at 
full cost.
54 Such a deviation from extant policy occurred in 2020–21 during the response to the 
COVID-19 pandemic when Defence ministers directed that marginal cost recovery would 
apply to all areas of the response, with the exception of those that ordinarily would be 
delivered at zero cost or where commercial alternatives were available.
49
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

 
Key points
• Defence provides support to the civil authorities for resilience in the UK.
• With a few exceptions, Defence ministerial authority must be sought for 
any request for Defence resources under MACA.
• Under the UK government’s Integrated Emergency Management 
principles, the UK Armed Forces can expect to be involved across the full 
range of planning, preparation, and response to disruptive challenges, as 
well as further recovery tasks.
• The Defence contribution to resilience is usually provided by Defence 
through spare capacity.
• There are three possible legal bases for a MACA deployment: the Royal 
Prerogative; a Defence Council Order under the Emergency Powers 
Act 1964; or emergency regulations made under the Civil Contingencies 
Act 2004.
• During an incident where there is imminent threat to life, a need to alleviate 
distress or to protect significant property, local military commanders are 
authorised to provide immediate assistance without recourse to higher 
authority.
• Providing Defence assistance is governed by four principles, authorised 
when: 
 o there is a definite need to act and the tasks the Armed Forces are being 
asked to perform are clear;
 o other options, including mutual aid, commercial alternatives, or the  
voluntary sector have been discounted; and either
 o the civil authority lacks the necessary capability to fulfil the task and it is 
unreasonable or prohibitively expensive to expect it to develop one; or
 o the civil authority has all or some of the capability, but it may not be 
available immediately, or to the required scale, and the urgency of the task 
requires rapid external support from the MOD.
• With a few exceptions, MACA activity is not funded from the MOD budget 
and is therefore conducted on a repayment basis.
50
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2
Policy: ends

Annex 2A
Charging for military aid to 
the civil authorities activity
2A.1. The MOD’s charging mechanisms are described in more detail in 
this annex. They are shown in descending order of scale, but application is 
in accordance with Table 2.1. For further detail see Joint Service Publication 
(JSP) 462, Financial Management and Charging Policy, Part 1 and Part 2. 
2A.2. Full costs. Full costs cover both direct and indirect expenditure incurred 
in providing the assistance, including basic pay, allowances of the personnel 
involved and marginal costs expenditure (see below). Under HM Treasury rules 
it is normal for government departments to recover full costs as default. Full 
costs are likely to be recovered in the following circumstances.
• When there are extended or repeated calls for the same MOD 
support; regular use of the same MOD resources is likely to attract 
full costs, even if they are being used by different civil authorities.
• Where the civil authorities can make alternative arrangements (for 
example, mutual aid) but have not done so.
• Where the civil authority charges for the service they are providing 
(through Defence) or have an additional budget allocation for the 
overall task.
• Where support is non-emergency, planned or routine support, 
unless it is judged there is a Defence benefit to Defence which 
offsets the cost.
2A.3. Marginal costs. Marginal costs are costs for military activity that 
would not otherwise have been incurred by the MOD. This includes: travel; 
subsistence; fuel; the cancellation of contracts as a result of Defence 
conducting MACA tasks; mobilisation bounty for Reserve Forces; and any 
similar expenditure. In addition, there may be an ‘opportunity cost’, which is 
the cost of a resource in terms of its alternative use. For example, the costs of 
deferring/cancelling planned Defence activity or recalling personnel from leave 
or stand down to hold them at increased readiness. Defence Resources may 
51
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2A
Policy: ends

recommend applying a flat rate to cover such costs. Marginal costs may be 
applied when:
• a task is undertaken on behalf of the civil authorities and has a 
direct benefit to the MOD;
• a task can be combined with an action that the MOD would 
undertake on its own behalf (for example, when a MACA task 
provides Defence-related training for our Armed Forces); and
• responding to an emergency, the strategic coordinating group has 
been established.55
2A.4. Recovery at zero marginal cost. Costs may be waived when:
• there is an imminent threat to life;
• there is a need to alleviate distress;
• there is a need to protect significant property;
• Defence deploys a military liaison capability and/or a military 
assessment team; or
• there are other exceptional circumstances.
In all other circumstances, the decision to waive costs is taken by ministers. 
Defence Infrastructure Organisation charging
2A.5. The indicative cost for using land/buildings is determined by the 
Defence Infrastructure Organisation or the commercial contractor managing 
the estate. The MOD has no authority to abate charges on behalf of 
commercial partners, for example, Landmarc, who manage the Defence 
Training Estate; however, commercial partners may be willing to do so. 
55 Or local resilience partnership in Scotland or emergency preparedness group in 
Northern Ireland.
52
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2A
Policy: ends

Reserve Forces and Cadets Association
2A.6. As a general principle, where goods or services are provided by the 
Reserve Forces and Cadets Association to an outside body, the full cost of 
its provision must be charged. The rules for abating charges are covered in 
detail in JSP 368, including guidance on charges as they should be applied to 
other government departments. Chief executives are given some discretion in 
abating charges on receipt of a business case. 
Guidance
2 A .7. Contingency. During the planning phase, and dependent on the likely 
MACA task, Defence Resources will recommend charging a contingency 
amount to cover unforeseen costs. This provides the requesting authority with 
a realistic figure to help with planning and evaluating value for money.
2A.8. Recovery. The Director General Finance is responsible for coordinating 
the recovery of costs when multiple MOD top level budgets (TLBs) are involved 
in MACA activity. Command/Civil Service secretaries will be issued with a 
financial instruction detailing the procedures to be followed. In all other cases, 
individual TLBs are responsible for ensuring processes are in place to recover 
costs. In all cases, TLB finance staff are to be consulted.
2A.9. Records. All expenditure/receipts (estimated or otherwise) should 
be reported by single-Service Command/TLB finance staff, through the 
budgetary chain of command to a civil secretary/budget manager. Units must 
keep detailed expenditure records with invoices for audit purposes.
2A.10. Cost estimate. It is often difficult to accurately predict the cost of 
Defence support. A civil authority that bases its request for MACA on the 
assumption that Defence support is cheaper than commercial sources could 
be mistaken. As a rule the MOD does not guarantee to provide a cost estimate 
(as opposed to guidance on the charging regime) when it considers providing 
the support.
2A.11. Value added tax. In most circumstances, the MOD will not charge 
value added tax (VAT) to other government departments. However, if there is 
a commercial alternative to MOD services/goods, then VAT must be charged 
so that the UK government is not undercutting the commercial market. Each 
scenario is reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
53
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2A
Policy: ends

2A.12. State aid. State aid is described as any advantage granted by public 
authorities through the application of state resources on a selective basis 
to any organisation that could potentially distort competition and trade. The 
description of state aid is very broad because ‘an advantage’ can take many 
forms: it is anything that an undertaking (an organisation engaged in economic 
activity) could not get on the open market. Using taxpayer-funded resources to 
help one or more organisations in a way that gives an advantage over others 
may be considered as state aid. State aid rules can (among other things) 
apply to the use or sale of a state asset for free or at less than market price. 
The rules can apply to funding given to charities, public authorities and other 
non-profit making bodies where they are involved in commercial activities.
54
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2A
Policy: ends

Notes
55
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
2A
Policy: ends

[Page 70: No extractable text]

Chapter 3 details the end-to-end process for the 
employment, command and control, and recovery of 
Defence capabilities assigned to providing support to the 
civil authorities. It outlines the resilience roles, the military aid 
request mechanism, and planning considerations.
Section 1 – Roles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Section 2 – Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Section 3 – Requesting Defence support  . . . . . . . 65
Section 4 – Planning considerations . . . . . . . . . . 70
Section 5 – Integrity of UK waters and airspace . . . . 79
Section 6 – Military operations in support of strategic  
                   and overseas tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Section 7 – Related activity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Annex 3A – Liaison  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
Annex 3B – Military aid to the civil authorities  
                   request form guidance  . . . . . . . . . . 89
Annex 3C – Military aid to the civil authorities  
                   request process   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Annex 3D – Military support to the mounting of  
                   operations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
57
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 3

What the military do so well 
is planning for huge surges, 
because that’s in the nature of their 
challenges.
 
Richard Jones, Consultant Cardiologist,  
Queen Alexandra Hospital Portsmouth,  
British Medical Journal   
”
“
58
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Chapter 3
Process: ways
Section 1 – Roles
3.1. In response to requests for assistance, Defence may contribute in six 
main roles, or functions. These are:
• command and control;
• liaison;
• planning;
• specialist advice and capability;
• general and non-specialist support; and
• education and training.
Role 1: Command and control
3.2. Strategic. The Ministry of Defence (MOD) acts as both a military 
strategic headquarters and a Department of State. Deputy Chief of the 
Defence Staff (Military Strategy and Operations) and the Director General 
Security Policy provide strategic guidance to ministers and other government 
departments through the Cabinet Office Briefing Room (COBR). Security 
Policy and Operations (SPO) Directorate will take the lead for all UK operations 
activity.
3.3. Full command. Full command will usually be retained and exercised 
by the single-Service chiefs. A description of normal military operational and 
tactical levels of command is below.
a. Operational command. At the military operational level, the 
British Army’s Commander Home Command is appointed as the 
Standing Joint Commander (United Kingdom) (SJC(UK)). The SJC(UK) 
coordinates all military aid to the civil authorities (MACA) activity and is 
responsible for operations on the UK land mass.56 When undertaking a 
MACA operation, the SJC(UK) is known usually as the ‘joint commander’ 
56 Commander Operations, within the Maritime Operations Centre, retains command for 
operations in UK territorial waters. Air Officer Commanding 11 Group, in their capacity as 
UK air defence commander, is generally responsible for air operations within UK airspace.
59
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

and is responsible to the Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) for planning, 
executing and conducting Defence’s contribution to resilience operations 
and other nominated operations, in their respective area, during 
peacetime. To initiate this, the CDS will issue a formal directive to the 
SJC(UK), which specifies tasks and an area of operations. All MACA 
requests are coordinated by the Headquarters Standing Joint Command 
(United Kingdom) (HQ SJC(UK)) so that one operational headquarters 
retains oversight of the overall situation. It is likely that operations in 
the maritime or air domains will be passed to respective single-Service 
headquarters to be executed. HQ SJC(UK) can conduct joint actions 
and maintains close links with the three single-Service commands, 
Strategic Command and the Defence agencies for force generation.
b. Tactical command on land. At the military tactical level, command 
and control of Defence forces on the land will usually be delivered 
through the British Army’s regional point of command (RPoC) 
structure. The RPoCs comprise the Headquarters of London District, 
a 2* headquarters in the capital, together with nine further British Army 
brigades and headquarters 57 across the remainder of the UK. RPoC 
headquarters maintain strong links with the civil authorities within 
boundaries to understand the likely disruptive challenges that may occur. 
When tasked by the SJC(UK), their commanders step up to assume the 
role of joint military commanders (JMCs) who will exercise command 
over Defence assets within boundaries. 
c. Tactical command at sea. Tactical command and control of 
maritime assets dealing with incursions and movement in home waters is 
coordinated through the Joint Maritime Operations Coordination Centre  
(JMOCC), within the National Maritime Information Centre. This is a 
comprehensive multi-agency maritime response centre coordinating the 
activities of Border Force maritime command, Royal Navy offshore patrol 
vessels, Marine Management Organisation, Maritime and Coastguard 
Agency, and the police on a national basis.
57 London District is commanded by a major general, referred to as a 2*. The further nine 
RPoCs comprise seven brigade headquarters, each commanded by a brigadier, and two 
regional headquarters in England, each commanded by a colonel.
60
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

3.4. Coordinating authority. The HQ SJC(UK) will execute the role of 
coordinating authority over the activities of Defence agencies.58 Specifically, it 
oversees the deployment, management and recovery of any assets generated 
from Defence agencies. Figure 3.1 shows the command and control model.
Figure 3.1 – Generic command and control model for resilience/security 
operations
58 These comprise: Atomic Weapons Establishment (AWE), Defence Science and 
Technology Laboratory (Dstl), Defence Nuclear Organisation, Defence Equipment and 
Support (DE&S), Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO) and Defence Training Estate.
Single agency or 
multi-agency
civil responders
StrategicTacticalOperational
StrategicOperationalTactical
Civil authorities
Lead government 
department
Devolved 
administration 
(if appropriate)
Single 
agency
Multi agency 
(LRF/SCG/
LRP)
Headquarters 
Standing 
Joint 
Command 
(UK)
MOD Security 
Policy and 
Operations
Maritime 
Operations 
Centre
11 Group
Royal Navy 
JMC
RPoC 
JMC
Royal Air 
Force 
JMC
• Royal Navy
• British Army
• Royal Air Force
• Strategic
   Command
• DE&S
• AWE
• Dstl
Defence 
liaison 
ofﬁcers
JMC – tactical command or operational 
command of assigned military forces
Defence
Event
AWE Atomic Weapons Establishment
DE&S Defence Equipment and Support
Dstl Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
JMC joint military commander
LRF local resilience forum
LRP local resilience partnership
MACA military aid to the civil authorities
MOD Ministry of Defence
RPoC regional points of command
SCG strategic coordinating group
MACA request
Coordination
Force generation
Direction and 
coordination
Command 
and control
61
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Role 2 – Liaison
3.5. Defence support to the civil authorities is dependent upon timely and 
effective liaison with other government departments, civil authorities and, 
occasionally, commercial concerns. Defence’s resilience capability is built 
around a network of full-time liaison officers which comprise:
• a network of strategic liaison officers embedded with other 
government departments;59
• joint regional liaison officers (JRLOs);
• Royal Navy regional liaison officers (RNRLOs);
• Royal Air Force regional liaison officers (RAFRLOs); and
• military liaison officers (MLO) and teams.60
Role 3 – Planning
3.6. In response to specific events, if requested to do so under MACA 
arrangements, Defence may deploy specialist planners into government 
at all levels. Such an undertaking is not designed to take over all planning 
responsibilities from the civil authority – civil primacy remains – rather, it would 
be to provide complementary and specialist planning support for a specific set 
of circumstances and, usually, for a time-bound period.61
Role 4 – Specialist advice and capability
3.7. Defence can deploy specialist capabilities and provide advice to support 
the civil authorities. Defence specialist support is focused on eight areas:
• explosive ordnance disposal;
• specialist scientific support, primarily from the Atomic Weapons 
Establishment (AWE) and the Defence Science and Technology 
Laboratory (Dstl);
59 During the COVID-19 response liaison officers were embedded with, amongst 
others, the Cabinet Office, the Department for Health and Social Care, the Department 
for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities, the Welsh and Scottish governments and the 
Northern Ireland Executive. These ensured situational awareness and enabled Defence’s 
support to partners across government.
60 Details of these are in Annex 3A.
61 Operation Rescript, Defence support in response to the COVID-19 pandemic of 
2020-21, saw the deployment of a large number of planning staff into other government 
departments, devolved administrations and local government across the UK.
62
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

• intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance;
• communications;
• cyber and electromagnetic activities;62
• logistic; 
• engineering; and
• medical capabilities.
Role 5 – General and non-specialist support
3.8. Defence may deploy general support to the civil authorities. Consulting 
with Strategic Command and the single-Services, the SPO Directorate is likely 
to use the most appropriate and available Regular unit or Service personnel. 
While personnel may not need specific pre-deployment training, all personnel 
required to support a Defence operation in the UK will undergo a period of 
reception, staging, onward movement and integration to include task-oriented 
training or familiarisation, which may be designed and delivered by the civil 
authorities as required.
a. Counterterrorism operations. Although counterterrorism operations 
are police-led, there may be circumstances where Defence assets are 
required to deploy in support of them.
b. UK standby battalions. The British Army fields three UK standby 
battalions (UKSBs); they provide the British Army’s generalist force of 
choice for operations in support of civil authorities. These are described 
further in Chapter 4.
Role 6 – Education and training
3.9. The MOD directs and delivers a wide range of resilience collective 
and individual training for both Defence and non-Defence audiences. This is 
described in more detail in Chapter 4.
62 The functional owner for cyber defence is the MOD Chief Information Office.
63
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Section 2 – Tasks
3.10. Defence support to the civil authorities falls into four broad categories:
• fixed tasks;
• enduring tasks;
• response phase tasks; and
• recovery phase tasks.
3.11. Fixed tasks. Fixed tasks are the irreducible minimum tasks that Defence 
is liable to deliver on a continual basis irrespective of other demands, including 
in the event of warfighting at scale. Fixed tasks are non-discretionary and 
delivered by assigned forces.
3.12. Enduring tasks. Enduring tasks comprise a wide range of tasks, usually 
undertaken on an open-ended basis, and may be underpinned by written 
agreements with requesting government departments. Examples include the 
Royal Navy’s contribution to fishery protection and the tri-Service support to 
explosive ordnance disposal.
64
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways
The military can work with other organisations to assist with emergency responses

3.13. Response phase tasks. One of the UK government’s standing strategic 
priorities during a disruptive challenge is to ‘protect life and, as far as possible, 
property, and alleviate suffering’. Defence support during the response phase 
of a civil-led operation contributes to delivering this desired outcome. The 
process to be followed for delivering Defence support will depend upon the 
specific circumstances at the time. 
a. Immediate assistance. In response to an incident, where the need 
for assistance is urgent and where time does not allow for approval 
from higher authority, a local commander may assist without consulting 
the chain of command.
b. Routine response. In all other circumstances, where there is time 
to consult the chain of command, Defence assistance will be sought 
using the request process and documentation described in Section 3. 
Requests from the local level will usually, although not exclusively, be 
made by the chair of a strategic coordinating group (SCG) or equivalent 
and submitted in writing to the relevant lead government department 
(LGD) for further consideration.
3.14. Recovery phase tasks. Recovery phase tasks, by definition, will seldom 
be urgent in nature. Requests for assistance must be submitted in writing 
by the civil authority. Central government may, however, choose to commit 
Defence to recovery phase tasks on a ‘top down’ basis rather than in response 
to a ‘bottom up’ request.
Section 3 – Requesting Defence 
support
3.15. Requests for support from Defence will follow two broad channels: ‘top 
down’, where the request will be driven from central government or ‘bottom 
up’, where the request will be made by civil authorities at the sub-national, 
devolved or local level. Support may be requested during the preparatory, 
response and/or recovery phases. Requests will always be required in writing 
and will need authorisation through a process that is described below and 
illustrated in Figure 3.2.
65
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Figure 3.2 – Military aid to the civil authorities process
Principles
3.16. Top down requests. Top down requests are generated above the local 
level by the LGD or by the COBR. Before proceeding with the request, MOD 
staff will confirm the details of which department will fund the cost of Defence 
support and where any liability might lie. SPO Directorate staff will determine 
the capability required and balance this against current Defence priorities and 
operations in submissions to ministers.
Top down
Event occurs
Lead government 
department 
submits request
Ministry of 
Defence considers 
request
Ministry of 
Defence 
authorises request
Bottom up
Forces 
generated 
and deployed
Ministry of Defence 
authorises request
Ministry of Defence 
considers request
Lead government 
department 
submits request
Lead government 
department 
considers request
Civil authorities 
submit request at 
local level
Event occurs
Forces 
generated 
and deployed
66
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

3.17. Bottom up requests. Requests for support are submitted in writing 
by the civil authority, usually signed off by a police officer of at least chief 
superintendent rank, the chair of a SCG,63 or an individual of equivalent  
status from an organisation categorised as a responder under the Civil 
Contingencies Act 2004. On those rare occasions that a commercial concern 
requires Defence assistance, the request must be channelled through the 
appropriate LGD. 
3.18. Devolved administrations. The LGD principle applies and Defence will 
expect requests relating to support in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales to 
be channelled via the Northern Ireland Office, the Scotland Office or the Wales 
Office as appropriate, and not direct from the devolved government. Further 
detail on the process as it applies in the devolved administrations is contained 
in Annex 1A.
3.19. Overseas Territories. MACA does not apply to British Overseas 
Territories. Notwithstanding this, a mechanism for Defence to support 
these areas exists. As required, the respective governor, embassy or high 
commission of these Overseas Territories can submit an overseas assistance 
request for Defence assistance. These requests are then endorsed by the 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) before being 
submitted to the MOD. 
3.20. Request format. Requests must be submitted in writing using a 
standard template providing as much information as is available at the time 
(explained further in Annex 3B). The key information required includes:
• the desired effect;
• time expected on task;
• acceptance of financial responsibility; and
• acceptance of liability.
HQ SJC(UK) should be provided with a copy of the request to be submitted 
to the LGD by the regional liaison officer as soon as possible. Requesters are 
encouraged to submit requests early, and in draft, to allow HQ SJC(UK) to 
conduct early staffing and use the opportunity, if required, to refine the details 
of the prospective task. 
63 Or either the regional or local resilience partnership in Scotland, or the emergency 
preparedness group in Northern Ireland.
67
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

3.21. Consideration by the lead government department. LGDs will 
consider whether to support the request. Factors that will influence their 
decision include:
• financial constraints;
• availability of mutual aid; 
• availability of commercial and other sources of support; and
• reputation.
A request for Defence assistance must be approved at ministerial level within 
the requesting government department. Once the request is approved, it 
should be sent to the CDS’s duty officer within the MOD.64
3.22. Considerations by the Ministry of Defence. The SPO Directorate will 
consider the request against the four MACA criteria and the legal tests detailed 
in Chapter 2. SPO will provide policy-based military advice to ministers to help 
them decide. Their decision will address:
• policy – whether the request is compliant with Defence policy;
• political picture – if there is a political imperative or direction to 
undertake a task;
• precedent – if Defence has previously undertaken a similar task then 
that may increase the likelihood of further requests being approved; 
• legal – that the legal powers exist for the Service personnel to 
deploy on the task, and that undertaking the requested activity 
would comply with the law; and
• capacity/capability – whether Defence can conduct the task.
3.23. Activation. The MOD will follow the process detailed in Annex 3C. A 
hierarchy of documentation related to the operation may include the following.
a. Defence Council Order. If the task is for non-Defence activity 
authorised under the Emergency Powers Act 1964 (Section 2), a 
Defence Council Order is required to order Service personnel to 
deploy. It will authorise Defence to undertake defined tasks within a 
specified time frame.
64 Copied to the MOD UK Operations Team.
68
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

b. Memorandum of understanding/service level agreement.  For 
planned support, a memorandum of understanding or service level 
agreement will be agreed between the requesting civil authority and 
Defence setting out the principles of the support provided and the 
respective roles and responsibilities.
c. Activation order. An activation order is a formal, military document 
authorising the force generation of assets, from all three Services if 
required, to undertake specified tasks and, usually, placing them under 
the operational command of SJC(UK).
d. Operational staff work. The joint commander, single-Service 
commanders and RPoC commanders/JMCs will issue a range of 
operational staff work as appropriate to the operation.
Miscellaneous
3.24. Reserve Forces and Cadets Association estate. Where the civil 
authorities request to use estate owned or managed by the Reserve Forces 
and Cadets Association (RFCA), the relevant regional liaison officer is to ensure 
that the local RFCA headquarters is made aware of the request.65 Authorisation 
for its use will be in accordance with the flowchart in Annex 3C. Advice can be 
sought from the MOD’s Directorate of Reserve Forces and Cadets. It should 
be noted that RFCAs operate a scheme called Alternative Venues, under which 
their estate can be used by public or private bodies, or private individuals for 
a range of events including conferences, meetings and social events on a 
repayment basis. Care should be taken to ensure that tasks that are clearly 
related to civil authority training and preparation for, or response to, disruptive 
challenges are staffed as MACA requests rather than under the Alternative 
Venues scheme, as the latter process does not allow for proper ministerial 
scrutiny of the requested support. If in doubt, RFCAs should consult their local 
regional liaison officer for further advice. 
3.25. Non-core estate. Several ranges and other elements of Defence estate 
within the UK are owned by the MOD but managed by AWE, Dstl or QinetiQ 
under a long-term partnering agreement. Should such estate be required, then 
the relevant British Army RPoC brigade/headquarters commander is to be 
informed. In addition, the request is to be submitted by the relevant regional 
liaison officer to the Training, Evaluation, Services and Targets team within 
65 Joint Service Publication (JSP) 814, Policy and Regulations for MOD Sponsored 
Cadet Forces, Version 2, May 2019.
69
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Headquarters Defence Equipment and Support (DE&S), who will advise on the 
appropriateness of the request for its use. Formal authorisation for its use will 
be given by DE&S, in consultation with the relevant agency.
3.26. Defence Infrastructure Organisation. Arrangements for using Defence 
estate managed by the Defence Infrastructure Organisation are covered in 
Chapter 4. 
Section 4 – Planning considerations
3.27 . Planning assistance. Defence staff training places great emphasis on 
the ability to conduct planning in support of military operations. Such skills 
are readily transferable in terms of planning for, and responding to, disruptive 
challenges in the UK, with those who have undertaken command and staff 
training at the Defence Academy being in demand. There are many examples 
of Defence support in this area, and whilst Defence planning support to the 
2012 London Olympic Games contributed to the success of that event, the 
contribution of military planners during the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020–21 
proved pivotal. Defence planners were deployed into a wide range of bodies, 
including Whitehall-based departments, devolved governments, local resilience 
forums (and equivalent), public health agencies and local authorities. Civil 
authorities should be encouraged to seek early assistance from our Armed 
Forces. Requesting authorities should provide accurate job specifications 
so that the correctly qualified and experienced individuals can be selected. 
Moreover, working effectively with the civil authorities requires personal skills 
over and above those deployed usually within military environments; thus, 
military planners must be selected and trained. 66
3.28. Planning doctrine. Planning guidance within Allied Joint Publication 
(AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  (with UK national 
elements) will allow military planners to assist civil authorities in preparing for, 
managing the response to, and recovery from an emergency. 
3.29. Military assessment team. Following a formal request, a military 
assessment team may be deployed alongside or to complement an existing 
MLO to provide specific or specialist military advice to civil authorities in 
preparation for, or in response to, a disruptive challenge. The deployment 
of a military assessment team does not constitute the deployment of a 
66 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine  provides further 
guidance on working with partners across government. 
70
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

formal reconnaissance party, and there will be times where, having studied 
the situation, a team leader determines that there is no task for Defence 
to perform. For this reason, no charge will be made to the requesting civil 
authority. Except for the Royal Engineer Infrastructure Response Teams held 
at readiness by 170 Engineer Group, military assessment teams have no 
standard size, shape or readiness. They will be generated based upon the 
nature of the emerging situation and will receive an operational orientation 
briefing prior to deployment. Deployment of a military assessment team will be 
authorised by Head Operations (Military) within the SPO Directorate.
3.30. Communication and information. A MACA operation may involve 
several different agencies. Communication interoperability and a finite amount 
of emergency service communication equipment mean that communication 
information systems must be considered early in the MACA process. The early 
development of an information exchange requirement, built in conjunction 
with the other partners in the operation, will assist in developing an agreed 
communications approach and will negate the risk of ‘unofficial systems’ being 
employed. 
3.31. Readiness. When directed, Defence will provide capability at readiness 
to support the civil authorities. Readiness is defined as: the period of time 
measured from an initiation order to the moment when the headquarters or unit 
is ready to perform its task from its peacetime location (permanent or forward 
deployed) or ready for deployment.67 Readiness may be described in two ways.
a. Notice to move. This is the time allowed, expressed usually in days 
or hours, for units to be able to move from their base location following 
an order from higher authority to do so.
b. Notice to effect. This is the time allowed, expressed usually in 
days or hours, for units to be at a location of employment, generating a 
prearranged effect, with an agreed capability.
3.32. Best effort. Best effort is described as the rapid generation and 
deployment of personnel or capability, not nominated or pre-warned, for an 
operation, at best speed. Generating the force quickly may require risk to be 
taken against personnel, training and equipment, and may have an impact on 
other operations and activities. Under certain circumstances, such as security 
or counterterrorism operations, the need for rapid support from Defence might 
be of critical importance to the UK.
67 JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
71
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

3.33. Whole force. Where appropriate, the whole force approach will be 
applied, with Regulars, Reservists, civil servants and contractors being 
considered for use on operations in the UK. Defence personnel come with 
a broad mixture of skills, qualifications and experience, and may have local 
knowledge and contacts that will significantly enhance the effectiveness of 
the overall response. In response to a disruptive challenge, and following a 
formal request for support, Defence will select the most appropriate capability, 
at the appropriate readiness to create the required effect. Geography and the 
urgency of the situation will both have a bearing on force generation. 
3.34. Using Reservists. In response to a no- or short-notice event, it is 
more likely that Defence will deploy Regular Forces in response to a formal 
request for support from the civil authorities. However, Reservists from all 
three Services may have niche skills and qualifications more appropriate to 
an event and may have local knowledge and understanding far deeper than 
Regular Forces who may be deployed from further afield. For these reasons, 
whilst it is more likely that Reservists will be used in a follow-on capacity rather 
than as part of a short-notice response, wider factors may mean that their 
early use should not be discounted. Defence can generate Reserve Forces at 
differing speeds depending upon their terms and conditions of service. With 
the exception of certain roles and capabilities, most Reservists are not held 
at readiness for operations in the UK.68 However, for UK resilience operations, 
68 Some Reservists in 1 and 11 Signal Brigades are held on high readiness terms and 
conditions of service.
72
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways
Military aid to the civil authorities can involve assets and personnel from across the  
three Services, including Regulars and Reserves

Reservists may volunteer, with the support of their employer, to serve for an 
initial period of up to 14 days on Reserve Service Days (RSDs) without being 
mobilised. Where the requirement for Reservists is likely to endure beyond this 
14-day limit, discussion will be necessary to decide whether enough volunteers 
exist for personnel to be rotated; alternatively, mobilisation may become the 
preferred option.69 The following principles and conditions should be used to 
decide whether to employ Reservists on UK resilience operations.
a. The Reserves will be considered for deployment on all UK resilience 
operations where the training requirements are achievable. All Reservists 
being deployed on UK resilience operations which require force 
protection measures, such as counterterrorism and chemical, biological, 
radiological and nuclear (CBRN), must be mobilised from day one of 
being on task.
b. Reservists will normally be considered for deployment in their local 
area, defined as one hour’s travel from their home station. This principle 
seeks to ensure that increased use of Reserves on UK resilience 
operations does not undermine employer relationships.
c. Reservists will be considered for deployment when there is 
enough time for their generation. The time required will depend on the 
training standard for deployment on the operation. Where generation 
is very simple and volunteers are readily available, Reservists could 
be employed in the initial response phase. More commonly, it is 
expected that Regulars will provide the initial response but will then be 
relieved-in-place by the Reserve.
d. The single Services will cover the initial cost of deployments under 
voluntary training and other duties from their budget for RSDs. All three 
Services will meet the cost of mobilisation of the Reserves as they arise.
e. Where Reservists are employed in similar or equivalent roles on the 
same task or operation, they should, where possible, serve on the same 
conditions of service, either RSDs or mobilised. Single Services will be 
required to seek a waiver from the SPO Directorate/Reserve Forces and 
Cadets Directorate should they wish to deploy Reservists 
on different 
conditions of service.
69 In extremis, where a callout order is not in effect, Reservists may be used on RSDs for 
a period that does not exceed 14 days without recourse to mobilisation.
73
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

f. The SJC(UK) holds delegated authority to mobilise Reservists 
employed on high readiness Reserve from 1 and 11 Signal Brigades 
without further reference to the MOD. 
g. In many instances, Reserve Forces personnel may be contributing 
toward the resolution of a crisis as part of their civilian employment; this 
opportunity cost must be factored into the mobilisation decision.
h. With regards to cost recovery, the principles that apply to the 
use of Regular Forces will also apply to Reservists. However, any 
additional costs, such as mobilisation bounties or Reservist awards, 
will be absorbed by the relevant top level budget, unless the deployed 
Reservists are providing a niche capability.
i. RSDs are voluntary; there is no compulsion for the Reservist to 
report for duty. RSDs do not provide the Reservist or employer with 
the compensation packages received when mobilised. Therefore, unit 
leadership and employer engagement are critical to the provision of 
personnel on RSDs.
3.35. Apportionment. Where specialist capabilities are requested to 
support the civil authorities, the SPO Directorate will assign these from the 
single-Service command best placed to meet the task. For larger, more 
generic operations, the SPO Directorate may apply the 1:3:1 principle; against 
this ratio, personnel will be provided from the Royal Navy, British Army and 
Royal Air Force (RAF) respectively.70 Often this principle is combined with 
a geographic-based approach to force generation (for example, the Royal 
Marines are more likely to be used in South West England).
3.36. Cooperation and integration. The SPO Directorate will provide direction 
on any emerging requirement for military planners/specialists to augment other 
government departments, or work in conjunction with foreign governments 
during an emergency or event. Similarly, military planners/specialists should 
be prepared to establish quick, durable links with the equivalent civil authority 
planners.
70 The 1:3:1 principle means that, for every five personnel generated, one will be from the 
Royal Navy, three from the British Army and one from the RAF. It is usually applied based 
on ‘colour of cloth’; whereby RAF personnel serving with the Joint Helicopter Command 
are viewed as RAF, not British Army (in whose chain of command the Joint Helicopter 
Command resides).
74
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

3.37. Skills and capability. When considering Defence support, military 
planners and regional liaison officers must steer civil authorities towards 
asking for an effect.71 The use of effects-based terminology allows the SPO 
Directorate to develop the optimal military solution. This may include:
• specialist capability (for example, divers or boat units to assist with 
understand, clear and support);
• specialist personnel (for example, imagery analysts or Specialist 
Teams Royal Engineers to assist with understand); and
• units (for example, a UKSB to assist with tasks such as support, 
clear, protect and reassure). 
Operation Pitchpole – aerial imagery during  
Thames Valley flooding
In 2013–14, severe winter weather brought significant localised flooding 
to many parts of the UK. The effect of successive storms required 
local, sub-national and national coordinated responses. Defence initially 
responded to routine requests for assistance, but once the scale of the 
situation had been recognised, Defence put in place a flood relief operation 
(Operation Pitchpole) led by the SJC(UK). The continuous rainfall led to 
widespread ground saturation, with the River Thames recording the highest 
flow rates on record. 
There were a great number of MACA requests both for personnel and niche 
capabilities. While the National Police Air Service helicopters were able to 
provide low-level imagery, three of the SCGs responding to the flooding and 
the Environment Agency approached RAFRLO London and South East on 
12 February 2014 to request more strategic imagery. The RAFRLO worked 
with the SCGs to identify areas of interest for the intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance air platforms to overfly. Both Sentinel and Tornado 
GR4, fitted with RAPTOR pods, aircraft were used. Following analysis by 
RAF image analysts, the imagery product greatly assisted strategic planning 
and decision-making. This helped reduce both risk to life and damage to 
properties and infrastructure.
71 Resilience effects include: understand; clear; protect; reassure; warn; inform; 
evacuate; and support.
75
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

3.38. Support. Whilst preparing for, and during, disruptive challenges and 
similar events, civil authorities may seek to use Defence estate. This may 
include providing Defence estate, facilities and/or equipment to support:
• the mounting of a civil authority’s operation; or
• training and exercising activities undertaken, or led by, such 
authorities.
In both cases a formal written request is required, even when there may be 
a mutual benefit to Defence from supporting such activity. When staffing 
such requests the key consideration is whether the nature of the activity is 
deemed contentious or not.72 Authority to approve activity that is deemed 
non-contentious may be delegated to a Defence regional-level commander, 
whilst those considered contentious will require authorisation from the MOD 
Head of Operations (Military).73 Exceptionally, they may require ministerial 
authorisation. Unless directed otherwise, then the pre-planned activities will be 
charged at full cost. With regards to costs associated with the use of Defence 
estate, the Defence Infrastructure Organisation provides guidance and precise 
details on costs to be charged.74
72 There is no prescriptive definition of the word ‘contentious’, but it will include the effect 
on Defence’s reputation of supporting the activity, and the response of the media and/or 
wider general public.
73 Royal Navy: naval base commanders; and naval regional commanders. British Army: 
RPoC commanders. RAF: station commanders. 
74 Defence Infrastructure Organisation Standing Operating Instruction, Policy for Daily 
Rates of Charging for Facilities on the Defence Training Estate , 11 April 2019.
76
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways
Lessons are likely to be identified during training exercises and in operations undertaken

3.39. Lessons capture. Lessons are likely to be identified during all three 
phases of an operation: preparation, response and recovery. Adhering to 
Defence policy, the lessons process comprises the following.75
a. Collect. Observations are the foundations of the lessons 
process. HQ SJC(UK) collects observations from all relevant Defence 
organisations using a master lessons tracker and the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO)-endorsed format of observation, discussion, 
conclusion, recommendation (ODCR). Other media such as first 
impressions reports, post-operational reports, Microsoft Teams chat 
rooms, and TED-style talks are used also.
b. Analyse. Not all observations will be taken forward as an endorsed 
lesson. Thus, HQ SJC(UK) will analyse and filter all observations for 
duplication, relevance and seek further clarification if required. In 
accordance with standing practice, a quarterly military judgement panel 
will also be held as part of this process.
c. Action. The observation becomes subsequently a lesson identified, 
which is then required to be allocated to an appropriate organisation or 
body that has the authority, and the means, to resolve the highlighted 
problem or develop the proposed best practice.
d. Implement. During this phase the allocated organisation and 
supporting stakeholders will conduct the necessary work to resolve the 
lesson identified. The leadership of the involved organisations and the 
associated lessons teams will monitor and track progress to ensure that 
the lesson identified is fully addressed in a timely fashion.
e. Validate. Either judged case by case or at a quarterly operational 
lessons board, validation of a lesson identified is when the analysis 
and implementation phases are complete. The lesson identified then 
becomes a lesson learned. 
3.40. Lessons capture. HQ SJC(UK) is responsible for coordinating the capture 
of Defence lessons on the land, through in-mission and post-event reporting, and 
the appropriate follow-up action. Defence may be invited to contribute to the civil 
authorities’ lessons capture process. Whilst not obliged to support such events, 
where appropriate and when invited, Defence should endeavour to attend. At sea 
the Maritime Accident Investigation Branch will conduct a similar function. 
75 2016DIN03-020, Defence Lessons Policy.
77
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Operation Rescript – mass COVID-19 testing in 2020
On Friday 30 October 2020, the MOD was directed by the Prime Minister 
to assist with a mass testing team within the National Health Service (NHS) 
England test and trace programme by undertaking a whole town testing pilot 
in the City of Liverpool. This asymptomatic testing pilot had two purposes: 
first, to reduce the presence of COVID-19 in the city by trial; and second, to 
provide practical experience of whole town testing to guide national testing 
policy that might be applied elsewhere in the country. By the following Monday, 
8 Engineer Brigade had created a plan alongside the Department of Health 
and Social Care and had deployed its headquarters to Liverpool. It was given 
command of five UK Resilience Units (1st Battalion Irish Guards, King’s Royal 
Hussars, 1st Battalion the Yorkshire Regiment, 19 Regiment Royal Artillery and 
39 Engineer Regiment) and a support squadron. The tempo of the deployment 
required the force to be adaptive and learn ‘in-flight’ not only to optimise its 
testing processes, but also capture lessons that might be used to inform the 
development of the wider mass testing national programme. The effective use 
of key liaison officers at civil authority strategic, tactical and operational levels 
was essential to share lessons and observations from the sites in Liverpool 
rapidly, and to shape the national testing policy. The lessons process was given 
emphasis and it was command-led, with Commander 8 Engineer Brigade 
employing a dedicated staff officer to collect, process and share lessons daily 
across the force, as well as with local authorities and the NHS.
3.41. Military aid to the civil authorities versus civil engagement. Care 
must be taken to ensure that tasks which are clearly MACA-focused are not 
undertaken under the principles of civil engagement. The three uniformed 
Services each have slightly differing definitions of civil engagement but broadly 
include objectives such as enhancing Defence’s reputation, influence and 
standing.76 Civil engagement tasks occur in low-risk situations and are not 
in response to a specific and/or dynamic event. They may be authorised at 
unit level but are not routinely scrutinised by higher command prior to activity 
occurring. Any activity that requires Defence personnel to create effect in 
response to a disruptive challenge or similar circumstances must be planned 
and authorised as MACA.
76 The British Army’s definition of civil engagement is: the Army gains understanding, 
legitimacy and access through attraction activities, primarily engagement and outreach, 
but supported by communications. Engagement can be conducted at the strategic, 
operational and tactical level in order to develop mutual relationships, connect the Army 
with society, break down barriers, dispel myths, as well as identify opportunities for 
outreach and even recruiting activity.
78
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Section 5 – Integrity of UK waters and 
airspace
Direction
3.42. The UK is dependent on air lines of communication and shipping routes. 
The Defence Command Paper directs that Defence will provide high readiness 
air and maritime assets to deter and respond to threats to the UK.  
UK waters
3.43. The United Nation’s International Maritime Organization is the 
international body responsible for measures to improve maritime safety 
and security worldwide. Responsibility for safety and security in UK waters, 
including the exclusive economic zone, lies with the UK. As one part of this, 
the Department for Transport and the Maritime and Coastguard Agency 
are responsible for implementing the International Maritime Organization’s 
International Ship and Port Facility Security Code within UK waters and port 
facilities.77 The code contains detailed security-related requirements for national 
governments, port authorities and shipping companies.78
3.44. The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security details the UK’s approach 
to maritime security.79 This contains five maritime security objectives, the third 
and fourth of which have particular relevance to resilience and security within 
UK waters.80 The strategy requires a number of partners from other government 
departments and agencies to work together to deliver maritime security, which 
includes the MOD.81 The Royal Navy plays its part by its maritime security work. 
Six of the eight NATO maritime security activities contribute to UK resilience: 
maritime situational awareness; maritime security enforcement; fighting 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (for example, a nuclear device in a 
77 This is a mandatory requirement for all countries party to the International Convention 
for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974; the UK is a signatory.
78 International Maritime Organization, Guide to Maritime Security and the ISPS Code, 2012.
79 Her Majesty’s (HM) Government, The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security , 2014.
80 Ibid., page 9. Third objective: ‘protecting the UK, our citizens and our economy by 
supporting the safety and security of ports and offshore installations and Red Ensign 
group-flagged passenger and cargo ships’. Fourth objective: ‘assuring the security of vital 
maritime trade and energy transportation routes within the UK Marine Area’.
81 For example, the National Maritime Information Centre embodies the strategy’s core 
principles of integration and collaboration, by acting as the national fusion focal point for 
intelligence/information sharing. Whilst practically, delivering maritime security requires 
collaboration between the Maritime and Coastguard Agency, Border Force, HM Revenue 
and Customs, the National Crime Agency, the police and the Armed Forces.
79
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

ship heading up the Thames estuary); protecting critical infrastructure; maritime 
counterterrorism; and maritime trade operations. 
3.45. The MOD supports other government departments and agencies with 
responsibility for aspects of UK maritime security. These are shown in Table 3.1.
Responsibility Government department/agency
Maritime environmental 
protection
Department for Transport/Maritime and 
Coastguard Agency
Salvage Department for Transport/Maritime and 
Coastguard Agency
Investigations of maritime 
accidents
Department for Transport/Marine Accident 
Investigation Branch (MAIB)
Investigations of air accidents Department for Transport/Air Accidents 
Investigation Branch
Safety at sea Department for Transport/Maritime and 
Coastguard Agency
Civil search and rescue Department for Transport/Maritime and 
Coastguard Agency
Port and shipping security Department for Transport – transport security 82 
and MOD83 
Law enforcement Police
Immigration control Home Office/Border Force
Enforcement of UK customs 
and fiscal enforcement Her Majesty’s (HM) Revenue and Customs84 
Serious and organised crime 
including counter narcotic 
interdiction
National Crime Agency
Marine enforcement
Marine Management Organisation on behalf 
of the Department for the Environment, Food 
and Rural Affairs, the Scottish Fisheries 
Protection Agency and, in Northern Ireland, the 
Department of Agriculture, Environment and 
Rural Affairs.
Disaster relief and 
humanitarian aid
Home Office/devolved administrations/local 
authorities/police
Table 3.1 – UK government department responsibilities for maritime security
82 The Department for Transport is responsible for the security of all major means 
of transport. Transport Security is the department’s coordination arrangements for 
responding to serious disruption.
83 MOD: Naval Base Commander for naval dockyards.
84 HM Revenue and Customs has departmental responsibility to the Chief Secretary of 
the Treasury; this arrangement reflects HM Revenue and Customs primary responsibility, 
which is to collect revenue on goods brought into the UK.
80
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

UK airspace
3.46. The UK is responsible under International Civil Aviation Organisation 
and NATO obligations for the safety and security of aircraft flying through 
UK airspace. The Department for Transport, the MOD and the Civil Aviation 
Authority are responsible for the integrity of UK airspace. This is achieved by 
establishing situational awareness85 to detect and analyse potential airborne 
threats,86 with contingency plans for the interception, escort and potential 
neutralisation of established airborne threats.87 Detailed contingency plans for 
ensuring the integrity of UK airspace against airborne threats exist. However, 
these are beyond the classification of this publication.
Section 6 – Military operations in 
support of strategic and overseas tasks
3.47. Direction. The Defence Command Paper requires the UK Armed 
Forces, and wider Defence, to support several strategic and overseas tasks 
that are described below. These require Defence to work closely with civil 
authorities and adopt the same command and control protocols as those 
employed for UK security and resilience. These tasks, although categorised as 
UK operations, are not considered to be MACA even though they may include 
Defence support to some form of resilience or security operation or activity.
3.48. Military support to the mounting of operations. The planning, 
deployment, support and recovery of overseas operations are known as 
military support to the mounting of operations (MSMO). MSMO cover:
• UK lines of communication;
• the security of Defence critical assets;
• Defence nuclear emergency; and
85 Situational awareness is achieved by fusing civil air traffic control pictures with 
corresponding military data and resources to form the recognised air picture.
86 Potential airborne threats comprise: aircraft losing communications; renegade aircraft 
(a stolen or hijacked aircraft by terrorists to perpetrate a terrorist act); and asymmetric 
capabilities (including light aircraft, unmanned air vehicles and slow-moving airborne 
platforms).
87 Further details on defence counter-air operations are in Air Publication (AP) 3002, Air 
and Space Warfare, 4th Edition, October 2020.
81
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

• return of UK Armed Forces and their dependants.88
Planning for MSMO requires extensive liaison between Defence staffs and civil 
authorities, especially the police and local authorities. Direction on MSMO will 
be issued under separate arrangements by the SPO Directorate (see Annex 3D 
for further information).
Section 7 – Related activity
3.49. Aircraft post-crash management. Aircraft post-crash management 
(APCM) is not MACA activity; however, occasionally civil authorities mistakenly 
view APCM as MACA. This is due to the similarities that exist between 
MACA activity and an APCM response, both of which require Defence and 
civil authorities to work together. APCM policy is set by the Military Aviation 
Authority, which is part of the Defence Safety Authority; this sits outside the 
scope of this publication.89
3.50. Media. In response to a disruptive challenge within the UK, the 
government will appoint a LGD to oversee the coordination of communications 
and messaging. Routinely, the lead will not sit with the MOD and, thus, 
Defence will seek to align its media coverage with this wider government 
messaging to support the operation. Ensuring that Defence’s actions 
are consistent with the overall strategic narrative, and are communicated 
coherently with the public, cross-department and internally amongst Defence, 
is the responsibility of the Directorate of Defence Communications. Operations 
in support of the civil authorities offer an opportunity for Defence to showcase 
its capabilities and worth to the nation, but equally must be sensitively handled, 
with consideration always given to the supporting role of Defence and the 
primacy of other departments of state.90
88 Details of these operations are in Annex 3D.
89 The Military Aviation Authority’s Manual of Post-Crash Management , April 2015, is the 
definitive policy for APCM.
90 Further details on media can be found within 2020DIN03-005, Contact with the Media 
and Communicating in Public , January 2020.
82
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

 
Key points
• At the military operational level, the British Army’s Commander Home 
Command is appointed as the SJC(UK) for operations on UK land mass. 
Commander Operations, within the Maritime Operations Centre, retains 
command for operations in most UK territorial waters. 
• Defence’s capability for resilience operations is built around full-time liaison 
officers provided by the single Services. These include JRLOs, RNRLOs 
and RAFRLOs. They are complemented by a network of deputies and other 
MLOs as the task or situation dictates.
• When requested, and when in accordance with the MACA principles, 
Defence can deploy planners to complement the disruptive 
challenge-focused planning capabilities of government at all levels.
• Defence can provide both advice and specialist capabilities and general 
support to the civil authorities.
• Defence support to the civil authorities falls into four categories: 
 o enduring tasks;
 o fixed tasks;
 o response phase tasks; and
 o recovery phase tasks.
• Requests for Defence support may arise from: ‘top down’, where the 
request originates from central government, or ‘bottom up’, where the 
request will be made by civil authorities at the regional or local level or by 
devolved governments or Crown Dependencies.
• When considering Defence support, planners and regional liaison officers 
should steer civil authorities towards asking for an effect.
• As specified in the Defence Command Paper, the MOD supports other 
government departments and agencies with responsibility for aspects of UK 
maritime security.
• Detailed contingency plans for ensuring the integrity of UK airspace against 
airborne threats exist.
83
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3
Process: ways

Annex 3A
Liaison
3A.1. Defence deploys a network of full-time, Reservist and specially 
generated liaison officers at the national, devolved, sub-national and local 
levels. The nature and scale of this network will be driven by the civil authorities’ 
requirement for contingency planning, or as a response to a specific disruptive 
challenge. These points of contact fulfil several functions: providing situational 
awareness; maintaining robust communication channels; and facilitating 
understanding. At the national level this liaison function may be achieved 
through a mixture of embedded personnel, assigned permanently to other 
government departments or their agencies, complemented by the deployment 
of further time-bound staff to deal with specific situations. Liaison officers are 
used in a variety of circumstances, including: with partners across government 
(these can include other departments of state, non-ministerial departments); 
civil authorities; and, for specific operations, the commercial sector. Ultimately, 
wherever the commander requires greater understanding, enhanced clarity or 
expertise they may choose to deploy liaison officers.
3A.2. Whilst not part of the standing network of Defence resilience liaison 
officers, the MOD retains a specialist civil-military cooperation liaison capability 
within 6 (UK) Division, 77 Brigade. This finite capability has expertise in 
several areas, including all aspects of human security and other cross-cutting 
government departmental themes, security capacity building and stabilisation, 
and energy security. Much of this capability is Reservist and is held at various 
levels of readiness. Tasking for this capability occurs through the SPO 
Directorate. These liaison officers can operate in a reachback or deployed 
capacity, providing liaison capability with functional expertise to better facilitate 
mutual understanding and trust between assigned commanders and civil 
authorities, together with non-governmental organisations and agencies. 
3A.3. Commanders must carefully consider how they wish to deploy liaison 
officers for maximum effect and should not underestimate the breadth of civil 
agencies with which they may be required to coordinate and cooperate. Building 
relationships, understanding and developing trust with civil authority colleagues 
can take time. An approach that is abrasive or overbearing can polarise and 
be counterproductive. Consequently, selecting the right staff with the correct 
experience and knowledge is crucial. Commanders should avoid the temptation 
to by default employ junior or inexperienced staff in this role; these individuals may 
struggle to express the commander’s intent or describe the capabilities available 
or requested. An effective, trusted liaison officer can add considerable value.
84
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3A
Process: ways

3A.4. Royal Navy regional liaison officers. The Royal Navy maintains a 
regionally-based organisation of four naval regional commanders (NRCs) in 
the UK, all of whom have a broad range of single-Service responsibilities. 91 
Their duties include providing specialist advice on Royal Navy and Royal 
Marines capabilities and this is delivered through four RNRLOs. The laydown 
of RNRLOs within the Royal Navy regional chain of command is shown at 
Figure 3A.1. Routinely, the RNRLOs report to their respective NRCs; however, 
for resilience operations they are subordinated under the Royal Navy’s 
Commander Maritime Operations. 
Figure 3A.1 – Royal Navy regional commands within the UK 
91 The Naval Regional Commanders are based in Rosyth, Liverpool, Bristol and London.
NRHQ SNI  
HMS Scotia 
Rosyth
NRHQ EE
HMS President
London
EE        East of England
HMS    Her Majesty’s
            Ship
NE       Northern England
            Navy regional
            boundaries
            Navy regional 
            commanders
NRHQ  Naval regional 
            headquarters
SNI      Scotland and   
            Northern Ireland
WWE   Wales and West
            of England
NRHQ NE  
HMS Eaglet  
Liverpool
NRHQ WWE
HMS Flying Fox
Bristol
85
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3A
Process: ways

3A.5. Joint regional liaison officers. There are 18 full-time JRLOs and 
they all serve under the operational command of their respective RPoC 
commanders; however, they maintain direct liaison with HQ SJC(UK). JRLOs 
are the principal coordinators amongst the regional liaison officers due to the 
greater likelihood of British Army support to MACA activity. A map showing 
the British Army’s RPoC structure, through which JRLOs are deployed, is at 
Figure 3A.2.
Figure 3A.2 – British Army regional points of command in the UK 
Army regional 
points of 
command  
Army regional 
points of 
command
boundaries
HQ South 
West
Tidworth
160 (Welsh) 
Brigade
Brecon
HQ North 
West
Preston
51 Infantry 
Brigade
Edinburgh
38 Irish
Brigade
Lisburn 4 Infantry 
Brigade
Catterick
7 Infantry 
Brigade
Cottesmore11 Signal
Brigade
Donnington
London 
District
HQ 11 Security 
Assistance 
Brigade
Aldershot
HQ Regional 
Command
Aldershot
86
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3A
Process: ways

3A.6. Royal Air Force regional liaison officers. The RAF maintains a network 
of nine RAFRLOs in the UK who are the RAF focal point for UK resilience 
operations and are the Defence lead for all air-related civil or military liaison. 
They have additional responsibilities that include regional APCM response at 
very high readiness; counter-unmanned aircraft systems (C-UAS) advice; and 
Major Accident Control Regulations (MACR) coordination. They are under the 
operational command of Air Officer Commanding No. 11 Group at Headquarters 
Air Command. The RAFRLOs have seven part-time deputies to aid organisational 
resilience. A map showing the laydown of RAFRLOs is at Figure 3A.3.
Figure 3A.3 – Royal Air Force regional liaison officers in the UK 
RAFRLO
Northern
Ireland
RAFRLO
Northern 
England 
RAFRLO
East
Midlands
RAFRLO
East of
England
RAFRLO
London and 
South East
RAFRLO
West
MidlandsRAFRLO
Wales
RAFRLO
South 
West
RAF regional 
liaison 
ofﬁcers’ (RLO)
boundaries
RAFRLO
Scotland
87
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3A
Process: ways

3A .7. Wider liaison. A number of recent operations, most notably Defence 
support to the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020–21 under Operation Rescript, 
have highlighted the need for Defence to be prepared to field a wider range 
of liaison officers and planners at all levels: central and devolved government, 
sub-national bodies and agencies, and local responders. A network of liaison 
officers is maintained, trained and held at readiness for commitments such as 
Operation Temperer;92 however, in most circumstances such augmentation will 
be designed to suit the requirements of a specific operation.  
92 Operation Temperer is the UK government’s plan to support the police following a 
major disruptive event.
88
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3A
Process: ways

Annex 3B
Military aid to the civil 
authorities request form 
guidance
3B.1. If MACA is required, then a request form must be completed. The 
request form is referred to colloquially as an ‘Annex B’ as it is Annex B to a 
standard operating procedure sponsored by HQ SJC(UK). A copy of the most 
up-to-date template can be obtained from HQ SJC(UK) and it is essential 
that the most current version of the document is used.93 Guidance on 
completing the MACA request form, with example text highlighted in colour, 
follows, although civil authorities should be encouraged to use the skills of the 
network of regional liaison officers to ensure that forms are accurate, brief and 
unambiguous. The form represents a formal request from the civil authorities 
for Defence support and, therefore, must be signed off by them; however, 
should time allow then circulation of the draft to both HQ SJC(UK) and the 
British Army’s RPoC will allow the requirement to be finessed.
a. Introductory section. This must include details of the key 
personnel involved in the request together with the identification of 
the Department of State from which Defence will recover any costs 
incurred following the operation.
b. Headline summary of the situation – to be completed by the 
requesting agency. This includes:
 o an estimate of the severity of the event and the impact in terms 
of properties/people/installations affected;
 o any special considerations, such as vulnerable communities 
and future forecasts;
 o the implications of not achieving this request; and
 o an outline of next actions or events.
93 HQ SJC(UK) can be contacted at: SJCUK-HQ-Mailbox@mod.gov.uk.
89
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3B
Process: ways

c. The requesting agency should indicate what effect the Defence 
support is seeking to create. An example of this text is below.
In view of the identified risks of widespread flooding in multiple 
locations throughout the county the request for Defence 
assistance is as follows.
Preparation and prevention
Assist multi-agency responders to maximise the safety and 
security of communities by taking all reasonable steps to protect 
vulnerable premises and locations by:
• erecting temporary demountable flood defence barriers 
(where, how many, by when);
• constructing sandbag flood defences as required (where, 
how many, by when); and
• clearing debris that may lead to blockages of waterways 
(where, how many, by when).
Response
Assist multi-agency responders by:
• warning and informing the community of the flood risk 
(where, how many people, by when);
• being prepared to provide support to evacuate the 
community to designated rest centres (where, how many 
people and are any vulnerable communities involved, by 
when); and
• gaining access to communities cut-off by flood waters, 
ensuring that essential provisions are provided (where, how 
many people and are any vulnerable communities involved, 
by when).
90
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3B
Process: ways

d. This and subsequent sub-paragraphs all form part of the same 
part of question 4 on the Annex B. The requesting agency should 
indicate whether there is a requirement for armed assistance.
e. What is the effect required? The requesting agency should 
complete this and the following key words should be considered for 
use (this list is not exhaustive but these are terms recognised within 
Defence and may speed up the provision of capability): clear, confirm, 
coordinate, deliver, deny, deploy, distribute, escort, establish, evacuate, 
extract, find, guard, inform, liaise, protect, relieve, reassure, replenish, 
search, support, transport, warn.
f. The requesting agency should indicate what alternatives have been 
considered as explained in the example below.
Due to the size of preparation and prevention measures, and 
potential requirement for large-scale evacuation effort, the 
multi-agency response capabilities of responders has become 
stretched. Mutual aid for XXX County Council is in place along with 
a number of volunteer organisations.
g. What, when, where, how and for how long? The MOD liaison 
officer is to complete this, and include:
• effect to be created;
• what (assets required);
• when (date-time-group of all taskings and duration); and
• where (location).
h. An impact statement – The MOD liaison officer to complete as far 
as is practicable. It should include:
• disruptions to Defence;
• a hazard summary;
• a threat assessment; and
• any presentational issues.
i. Lastly, the requesting civil authority must agree to accept: 
• responsibility for the conduct of their own risk assessment;
91
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3B
Process: ways

• own indemnity against loss, damage, injury or death while on 
MOD estate (if applicable);
• it has been issued with an appropriate licence from the Defence 
Infrastructure Organisation (if applicable); 
• it is aware that costs will be recovered by the MOD; and
• any request by the MOD for indemnification.
j. As far as practicable estimated costs should be provided by the 
HQ SJC(UK) or by the appropriate command.
k. Upon completion of the civil authority’s part of the request 
form, a relevant local regional liaison officer will provide detail on 
the task (extracted from the effect requested by the civil authority), 
the suggested assets that should be generated, a description of 
key timings, and information on points of contact that will assist 
in the timely delivery of the effect. Thereafter the form will pass to 
HQ SJC(UK) for comment. 
3B.2. The form represents a formal request for Defence support and, 
if originated at local level, must be sent to the relevant lead government 
department for scrutiny and approval and thence to the MOD. The process 
described above, including the role of HQ SJC(UK), is to ensure that ministers 
in both the requesting LGD and Defence have full sight of the facts before 
making their decisions. 
92
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3B
Process: ways

Annex 3C
Military aid to the civil authorities request process 
Is the assistance required 
urgently to save life, 
alleviate distress or 
protect signiﬁcant 
property?
Is the 
assistance 
requested 
‘normal military 
work’? 1
Is the assistance 
requested ‘urgent work 
of national 
importance’? 2
Is the assistance 
requested use of Defence 
estate/facilities to support 
a civil authorities’ 
operation?
Is the assistance 
requested use of 
Defence estate/facilities 
to support a civil 
authorities’ training?
Activity can be 
undertaken at the local 
commander’s direction 
using the 1983 Defence 
Council Order – inform the  
MOD as soon as possible.
Ministerial 
authorisation 
required.
Defence Council Order 
needed authorising the 
work as ‘urgent work of 
national importance’ – it 
must be signed by 
minister and military 
representative.
1* Operations Directorate 
(Military) sign-off 
required. 3
May be authorised by 
single-Service regional 
commander. 4
1.  What constitutes ‘normal military work’ is a policy question, but in 
general terms would involve activity thatinvolves some degree of training 
which Defence already possesses for military purposes.
2.  What constitutes ‘urgent work of national importance’ is a policy 
question, but the implication is that this should be exceptional and rare.
3.  Delegated from the Minister for the Armed Forces – novel or 
contentious requests should be referred for ministerial authorisation and 
considered for HM Treasury endorsement. In the absence of Head 
Operations Military, Assistant Head (Military) UK Operations is 
empowered to authorise.
4.  Royal Navy – naval regional commander or naval base 
commander; Army – regional point of command commander; 
and Royal Air Force – RAF station commander. Referred for 
ministerial authorisation and considered for HM Treasury 
endorsement. In the absence of Head Operations Military, 
Assistant Head (Military) UK Operations is empowered to 
authorise.
93
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3C
Process: ways

Annex 3D
Military support to the 
mounting of operations
Reception arrangements for military patients
3D.1. Military casualties sustained overseas requiring specialist treatment will 
be repatriated to the UK whenever possible. Potentially, within an overseas 
theatre, prisoners of war and local/other civilians will be treated the same. 
The NHS is responsible for the reception, triage and acute secondary care of 
military patients repatriated to the UK. 
UK lines of communication
3D.2. The UK’s internal lines of communication (LOC) facilitate the 
deployment of our Armed Forces overseas, and during times of heightened 
threat are vulnerable to malign actors. Measures to protect them include 
movement control and the main road route system. When tasked by the 
MOD’s SPO Directorate, HQ SJC(UK) is responsible for maintaining plans to 
support the protection of UK LOC.94
United States/UK lines of communication
3D.3. Under the United States (US) Visiting Forces arrangement, the US 
military maintains bases in the UK. This arrangement allows for the provision 
of ad hoc assistance without recourse to politicians for the requisite authority. 
In addition, the UK government has a bilateral arrangement with their US 
counterparts known as the US/UK LOC. This arrangement, supported by 
other extant arrangements such as the Acquisition and Cross-Servicing 
Arrangement (ACSA), covers the provision of host-nation support that 
extends beyond the scope of the US Visiting Force arrangement; this 
support may increase during times of heightened tension/crisis. The Logistics 
Implementation Policy Document (LIPD) provides policy, reference and 
planning guidance to US/UK LOC. It is jointly sponsored by the US European 
94 Requests for details on movement control and main road route system measures 
should be directed to the HQ SJC(UK) duty officer.
94
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3D
Process: ways

Command’s US Office of Defence Co-Operation in the US Embassy and 
Assistant Chief of Defence Staff (Support Operations) within the MOD.95  
Defence critical infrastructure
3D.4. To be able to support wider UK security and resilience activity it is vital 
that Defence itself is resilient. The UK’s critical national infrastructure (CNI) 
provides vital services the country needs to function and these encompass 
facilities, technology, information, processes and people. Defence considers 
its CNI to be those facilities, technology, information, processes and people 
deemed essential to the delivery of non-discretionary Defence tasks. Any 
requirement for security or resilience enhancements are to be staffed through 
the appropriate channels of the front line commands/top level budget/enabling 
organisation responsible for Defence CNI (DefCNI) assets. Defence policy on 
protective security and the identification, categorisation and management of 
DefCNI is set out in Joint Service Publication 440, The Defence Manual of 
Security and Resilience.
Defence nuclear emergency
3D.5. The Secretary of State for Defence has overall responsibility for 
nuclear safety in the MOD, including the effectiveness of the Department’s 
nuclear emergency response arrangements. The Minister of State for the 
Armed Forces has ministerial responsibility for nuclear emergency response 
arrangements. The Defence Nuclear Organisation (DNO) is responsible for 
sponsoring the Defence Nuclear Enterprise, managing the Defence Nuclear 
portfolio, advising on UK nuclear policy, and on international cooperation on 
nuclear matters. DNO is also engaged in Defence Nuclear Enterprise safety 
and security, including nuclear emergency response policy and the assurance 
of emergency response arrangements.
3D.6. The MOD is appointed as the LGD for emergencies involving Defence 
nuclear assets (other than an emergency arising as a result of a terrorist event 
where the Home Office is appointed as the LGD). The MOD’s responsibility 
as LGD is for the response phase of the emergency. The Department for the 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) is the LGD for the recovery phase 
(the process of rebuilding, restoring and rehabilitating the community following 
an emergency) in England. The relevant devolved administration will be the 
LGD for the recovery phase outside of England.
95 Further information on the US/UK LOC is available through the CDS’s duty officer.
95
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3D
Process: ways

3 D.7.  On declaration of a Defence nuclear emergency the Defence Nuclear 
Emergency Organisation (DNEO) will be activated as part of the Defence Crisis 
Management Organisation. The Headquarters DNEO will:
• advise on MOD operational policy and provide military advice to the 
central government crisis management organisation;
• provide strategic guidance and direction for the military response 
and interpret policy decisions into clear unambiguous direction;
• advise Defence ministers and senior officials on the status of the 
emergency, including any mitigating actions; and
• represent the Department’s LGD role within the central government 
response.
3D.8. For a Defence nuclear emergency, the MOD’s senior representative 
coordinating the MOD operational response within the strategic coordination 
group is the MOD Coordinating Authority (MCA). The MCA is the primary focus 
for the direction and coordination of all MOD response activities in the incident 
area. In addition to the pre-planned military support required by the MCA to 
deal with their tasks, the civil authorities may also require additional military aid 
which would be requested under MACA arrangements. 
Return of UK Armed Forces and their dependants
3D.9. A large-scale evacuation of UK Armed Forces personnel and their 
dependants from a foreign-based UK garrison may require support from 
UK-based military units. Support may include assistance with:
• reception at the air or seaport of disembarkation;
• accommodation;
• feeding; and
• rehabilitation. 
96
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3D
Process: ways

Notes
97
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
3D
Process: ways

[Page 112: No extractable text]

Chapter 4
Chapter 4 considers key Defence capabilities that may 
be tasked to support military aid to the civil authorities 
operations. It outlines then how Defence conducts resilience 
and security education, training and exercises, to prepare for 
civil contingency tasks, alongside civil authorities, agencies 
and partners.
Section 1 – Capability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
Section 2 – Education and training  . . . . . . . . . . 121
Annex 4A – Categories of Defence training  . . . . . . 126
99
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 

The Armed Forces are good at 
mounting big, complex logistical 
operations at short notice; they 
are trained to provide transport 
and engineering support, and 
their medics can operate with poor 
infrastructure and strained resources.
 
Lifting our Sights Beyond 2030, 
Future Agenda”
“
100
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Chapter 4
Delivery: means
Section 1 – Capability
4.1. When requested, Defence can provide a range of niche capabilities along 
with non-specialist personnel to support the civil authorities. The Ministry 
of Defence’s (MOD’s) Security Policy and Operations (SPO) Directorate, in 
conjunction with single-Service commands and Strategic Command, will 
identify the best-placed and most appropriate military capability to support a 
request. In the first instance, as detailed in the previous section, civil authorities 
must consult with their joint or single-Service regional liaison officers when 
considering a request for Defence support.
Explosive ordnance disposal and search
4.2. Defence maintains a joint, rapidly deployable explosive ordnance 
disposal (EOD)96 and search97 (EOD&S) capability that is organised and scaled 
to counter the threat posed by explosive ordnance hazards. The explosive 
ordnance threat exists on land and at sea. This threat includes conventional 
munitions, improvised explosive devices, and chemical, biological, radiological 
and nuclear (CBRN) devices.
4.3. The Royal Navy and British Army contribute to the joint EOD&S capability. 
Their specialist capability reflects the environments in which they operate.
a. Royal Navy. The Royal Navy conducts maritime EOD (incorporating 
maritime improvised explosive device disposal) and underwater 
search in tidal waters and inland waterways, on the coastline below 
the high-water mark, in vessels at sea or in port, and on or in offshore 
installations.
96 EOD is defined as: the detection, accessing, uncovering, identification, mitigation, 
rendering safe, recovery, exploitation and final disposal of explosive ordinance, regardless 
of condition. Note: Explosive ordnance disposal extends to explosive remnants of war 
and stockpile, or other explosive ordnance that has become hazardous by damage or 
deterioration. NATOTerm.
97 Search is defined as: the capability to locate specific targets using intelligence 
assessments, systematic procedures and appropriate detection techniques. Pamphlet 
No. 11 Search Amendment 1, Military Engineering , Volume II Field Engineering, 2009.
101
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

b. British Army. The British Army acts as the command lead for 
EOD&S across Defence. Within the UK the British Army is responsible 
for: EOD command and control; the disposal of legacy wartime 
air-delivered munitions and service ammunition; CBRN devices; use 
of EOD electronic countermeasures; and providing advanced search, 
including hazardous environmental search, in the land environment.
4.4. Deployed Defence EOD&S assets operate in support of, and under 
the direction of, the civil police throughout the UK.98 The senior police officer 
present at the scene will be the incident commander. Tactical command of 
EOD&S teams is delegated to the Joint EOD&S Operations Centre in Didcot. 
For major incidents, a joint police/military command and control structure 
will be established; specialist military EOD&S advisers may reinforce police 
command levels.
4.5. Requests for EOD&S assistance are made directly to the Joint EOD&S 
Operations Centre by the civil police or the Maritime and Coastguard Agency. 
The best placed, available joint or single-Service specialist team will be 
identified and then tasked.99
98 Defence assets are responsible for EOD&S, in support of the civil police throughout 
the UK, except for Greater London, where Metropolitan Police assets are responsible for 
EOD&S.
99 Further direction and guidance on joint EOD&S is in Joint Service Publication 
(JSP) 364, Joint Service EOD Manua l, Part 1: Directive, August 2014.
102
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means
Our Armed Forces are responsible for disposing of legacy wartime munitions

Salvage and maritime operations
4.6. Defence provides a specialist team for salvage and maritime operations 
(SALMO); the civilian team belongs to the Defence Equipment and Support 
(DE&S) agency. The SALMO capability is held at very high readiness to support 
the MOD and other government departments’ marine salvage requirements. 
SALMO comprises a range of tasks/roles which can be used for military aid to 
the civil authorities (MACA), including:
• carrying out first aid repairs to damaged or submerged vessels;
• recovering ditched aircraft from the sea or inland waters;
• clearing ports, facilities and approaches;
• locating and recovering objects from the seabed, including deep 
water; and
• providing specialist advice on salvage operations.
4.7. The Defence SALMO capability largely relies on the commercial sector 
to provide specialist platforms and plans. An on-call commercial cell is 
available to support requests for SALMO capability. For example, under MACA 
arrangements the SALMO capability supported the Air Accident Investigation 
Branch following the crash of a Super Puma helicopter off the Shetland Islands 
in 2013. 
Aircraft recovery
4.8. The Joint Aircraft Recovery and Transportation Squadron (JARTS) 
provides Defence’s aircraft recovery and transportation capability for 
helicopter, fixed-wing aircraft and uncrated aircraft components. JARTS is 
tasked via the Defence Accident Investigation Branch (Air). A memorandum of 
understanding between the MOD and Civil Aviation Authority allows JARTS to 
deploy to civil air crash events without the specific authority of MOD.
Cyber and electromagnetic activities
4.9. National demands for support to cyber defence, such as Defence 
Digital Rapid Response Teams, will typically be processed through the 
National Cyber Security Centre to the MOD through an extant memorandum 
of understanding. The mobilisation of Cyber Reserves will be coordinated 
through the Defence Digital Operations Headquarters at MOD Corsham. 
103
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
4.10. Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) provides Defence 
with situational awareness, upon which timely and effective decisions and 
plans can be made. Defence ISR capability may be provided to support MACA 
operations. Defence ISR can assist with:
• support to police investigations, including locating missing persons; 
• wide area reconnaissance; 
• providing geospatial services and analysis, including providing a 
current operational picture; 
• infrastructure damage analysis and assessment; and 
• intelligence products to support our operations and other 
government departments’ and civil authority decision-making. 
4.11. Any request for ISR assistance must be driven by information 
requirements, rather than a specific collection platform. In a UK-land directed 
operation, following direction from the SPO Directorate, through Headquarters 
Standing Joint Command (United Kingdom) (HQ SJC(UK)), the Joint 
Intelligence Operations Centre is responsible for allocating and prioritising the 
collection requirement. For operations in the maritime, the Maritime Operations 
Centre will do this in conjunction with the Joint Intelligence Operations Centre. 
Intelligence support
4.12. An embedded J2 intelligence capability (known on Operation Rescript 
as the Information Manoeuvre Group (IMG)) provides a wide variety of 
intelligence and information-based subject matter expertise, much of which 
is held in the Reserve Force. HQ SJC(UK) has a broad range of embedded 
The early generation of a well-resourced and strongly-connected 
Information Manoeuvre Group enabled us to make sense of the 
vast array of inputs from the neural network and wider COVID-19 
information sources.
Lieutenant General Sir Tyrone Urch
“
104
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

intelligence disciplines including operational intelligence, geospatial intelligence, 
counter threat, information requirements management, and information 
activities and outreach. 
4.13. Such a structure assists Defence and partners across government 
understand the problems better, provide insights into planning (including force 
protection) and, in certain circumstances, may enable Defence to predict a 
likely MACA requirement. This is achieved through the analysis of data and 
qualitative reporting and it has the ability to apply intelligence methodologies to 
resilience problems and draw information from across government. 
Information Manoeuvre Group – Operation Rescript 2020–21  
predictive analysis 
In mid to late 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, government 
departments were planning for winter 2020–21, a period expected to 
severely test the UK’s resilience to concurrent crises. However, most 
departments were focused on a narrow set of issues, such as hospital 
capacity and testing, rather than the whole spectrum of issues including, 
for example, adverse weather. The IMG drew on the work of government 
departments to create a paper which presented the cumulative threat posed 
by possible resilience challenges. This provided Defence with a uniquely 
comprehensive insight into the threat posed by concurrent emergencies and 
the extent to which simultaneous support to partners across government 
may be required. 
Figure 4.1 – A graph from the IMG’s January 2021 paper, detailing 
the reasonable worst-case scenario for hospital occupancy during 
winter 2020–21; understanding occupancy was vital as Service 
personnel were deployed to hospitals worst hit by the virus
Source: IMG
105
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Information Manoeuvre Group – Operation Rescript 2020–21  
predictive analysis (continued)
Predict the military aid to civil authorities requirement
The data and reporting that the IMG had access to, and its relations with 
other government departments and local resilience forums (LRFs), enabled 
intelligence staff to provide indicators and warnings of several MACA 
requests before they were submitted. For example, in summer 2020 the UK 
government was focused on mitigating the impact of localised outbreaks 
to delay the second wave of the virus. IMG analysts identified localised 
outbreaks by comparing fluctuations in data. By analysing a range of metrics 
presented by the platform and fusing this with qualitative reporting at the local 
level, they were able to predict if outbreaks were likely to grow or whether 
they could be easily controlled. Working on this intelligence, HQ SJC(UK) 
supported local authorities by despatching testing teams to mitigate the 
outbreaks where required. 
Interactions with other government departments
HQ SJC(UK)’s understanding of the changing nature of the pandemic was 
strengthened by deploying intelligence staff to key roles across government, 
including the Cabinet Office and the Vaccine Task Force. Defence Intelligence 
staff supported the development of national policies, including the UK’s 
COVID-19 alert level system. As well as supporting cross-government 
outputs, staff provided the HQ SJC(UK) with key vital insights into 
developments related to the virus and where Defence may have been 
required to support.
4.14. National Maritime Information Centre. The National Maritime 
Information Centre (NMIC), part of the Joint Maritime Security Centre, provides 
the UK with a comprehensive picture of potential threats to UK maritime 
security. The NMIC brings together information and intelligence provided by 
all government maritime stakeholders including the MOD, the Joint Forces 
Intelligence Group, UK Border Force, the National Crime Agency, Her Majesty’s 
(HM) Revenue and Customs, the police, the Maritime and Coastguard Agency, 
the Marine Management Organisation, Department for Transport and the 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office. The NMIC facilitates a 
cross-government approach to understanding the maritime picture to assist 
departments and agencies to counter the maritime threats that the UK faces. 
106
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Mountain rescue
4.15. The Royal Air Force (RAF) Mountain Rescue Service (MRS) provides 
a ground-based, all-weather search and rescue organisation, maintained at 
high readiness. They operate in difficult terrain and poor weather conditions 
that inhibit helicopter operations. While the core role is aircraft post-crash 
management, they routinely support the emergency services under MACA 
arrangements and civilian mountain rescue teams to locate missing persons.
RAF Mountain Rescue Service support the police in the  
search for a missing child
In June 2016, Cheshire Constabulary requested the assistance of the RAF 
MRS in the search for a 14-year-old girl who had gone missing four days 
earlier. Twelve members of RAF MRS deployed from RAF Valley to the 
search area in Cheshire. On arrival, the team was briefed that the missing 
girl was diagnosed with depression and had not taken her medication. 
She had a history of running away and making shelters in the local woods; 
however, these areas had already been searched by friends and family 
members. The RAF MRS was tasked with searching high-probability 
wooded areas in the vicinity until light faded. The following morning the RAF 
team was tasked with further search areas in conjunction with search teams 
from North East Wales Search and Rescue (SAR), Cheshire Constabulary, 
Merseyside SAR, Cheshire SAR, National Police Air Service, Bolton 
SAR and Woodlands SAR. Shortly after the teams had deployed to their 
respective search areas the missing girl made herself known to a member 
of the public in an area five kilometres to the south east of the search area. 
She had been hiding in a hedge for five days and had become delirious due 
to dehydration and hunger. She was taken to hospital by ambulance and 
given the all clear soon afterward.
Planning specialists
4.16. Defence planning staff are well-versed, trained and practised in 
the principles of planning to meet specific strategic objectives. Moreover, 
Defence personnel assigned to support the civil authorities with planning will 
be conversant with the Joint Emergency Services Interoperability Principles 
(JESIP),100 as these underpin multi-agency emergency services planning. 
Planning capability is held at every level of military command.
100 Described in Chapter 1.
107
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

a. Strategic. The MOD’s SPO Directorate develops plans for Defence 
to support civil authorities in mitigating the effects of disruptive 
challenges detailed in the National Security Risk Assessment. When 
required, and usually in response to a request from other government 
departments, the MOD will embed planning staff, permanently or 
temporarily, to help develop contingency plans.
b. Operational. At the military operational level, HQ SJC(UK) will 
develop scenario-specific contingency/operation plans for providing 
Defence support to the civil authorities on UK land mass. Where 
required, such plans will be validated in conjunction with the civil 
authorities.
c. Tactical. At the military tactical level, planning support can be 
delivered by:
 o regional point of command (RPoC) headquarters and maritime 
battle staff;
 o single-Service units across the UK;
 o a UK standby battalion (UKSB); or
 o specialist units providing niche capability (for example,  
air/aviation, communications and logistics).
4.17. Where planners are required, the requesting agency must provide details 
of the role/task for which the planners are necessary so that the SPO Directorate 
can assign personnel with the correct knowledge, skills and experience. 
Command and control
4.18. Each Service can provide a command and control capability to 
complement and support civil authorities responding to a major  
incident/emergency or when planning for a major national event. Each  
of the single Services offers differing styles of command and control capability.
a. Royal Navy. Royal Navy vessels (frigates or larger), either at  
sea or alongside a port, can be used as an effective command  
and control facility for Category 1 responders during a major  
incident/emergency or when supporting a major national event. A Royal 
Navy vessel may provide a primary command and control node, as well 
as an alternative/back-up or a forward presence. Vessels are equipped 
with on-board facilities and communication and information systems 
(CIS) (including secret and above secret); this provides embarked 
108
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

responders with limited accommodation, meeting/planning rooms and 
real life support.
b. British Army. The British Army defaults primarily and routinely to 
the RPoC headquarters and occasionally to the UKSBs to provide a 
command and control capability in support of the civil authorities. Both 
these units can plug into civil authority command and control nodes 
quickly from operational (bronze) through to strategic (gold) level. This 
capability is routinely practised with civil authorities during multi-agency 
exercises.
c. Royal Air Force. The RAF can use RAF Force Protection Wing 
headquarters and RAF Regiment squadrons to provide forward 
command and control in support of civil authorities. Equipped with 
organic communications and information systems, these deployable 
forces can plug-in to a civil authority’s command and control nodes. 
Working to the lead RPoC headquarters or an RAF station when 
deployed, these self-contained RAF formations have a proven 
capability working at tactical coordinating group and bronze levels.
Communications
4.19. Joint Military Commander Communications Informations Systems 
(JMC CIS) is held at readiness to support UK operations and delivers 
information communication services for UK operations.101 This strategic 
capability is delivered via a combination of parent unit-based systems and 
deployable CIS, operated by Regular and Reservist personnel.
4.20. JMC CIS assets assigned to UK operations are held at 48 hours’ 
notice to effect, or less. Reservist readiness depends on a combination of 
high readiness Reserve, the Regular cadre and Reservist good will. Reservists 
provided CIS support during Operation Rescript in 2020–21.102 The SPO 
Directorate tasks JMC CIS for UK operations. JMC CIS has access to the 
following capabilities.
a. Fixed CIS which supports HQ SJC(UK) and the JMC CIS 
headquarters.
101 Less special forces and some specific air operations.
102 Operation Rescript was the Defence name for operations in support of civil authorities 
in the UK to assist with the COVID-19 response, including outbreak management, 
community testing and vaccination task forces.
109
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

b. A command support team/immediate response team – which 
supports small deployed command and control nodes.103
c. Airwave, which is the Home Office-managed radio system used 
by emergency services and Defence personnel assigned to UK 
operations.104
d. BOWMAN, which supports fixed/deployed locations in the event of 
a catastrophic failure of the UK communications infrastructure.
e. TACIT, which supports the UK’s counter-CBRN response.
4.21. In addition to JMC CIS, both the Royal Navy and RAF have organic 
communications capabilities. Royal Navy ships are equipped with CIS 
that can enhance and interoperate with civil authorities’ systems. The RAF 
communications capability may be used to enable air operations in support of 
MACA.
4.22. When working with other government departments in a collegiate 
planning role, Defence personnel must consider the limitations of MOD 
computer systems. Interoperability may require the use of liaison officers to 
other departments or changes to ways of working. 
Engineering
4.23. British Army engineering. British Army engineers offer a breadth 
of engineering capability that can be used in support of civil authority -led 
operations in the UK. Many of the skills and equipment in the civilian 
engineering industry are replicated by the Royal Engineers. These can be 
deployed into austere environments or situations where local authorities 
and other government departments lack the integral capability or time to 
set up contracts with industry. In addition, Commander 8 Engineer Brigade 
can provide specialist military engineering advice to a joint commander 
when required or, in certain circumstances, personally assume the role 
of joint military commander. The Royal Engineers can deliver a variety of 
reconnaissance activity, including the following.
103 Command support teams and immediate response teams deliver identical capability. 
Immediate response teams are staffed by Regulars; whereas, command support teams 
are staffed by Reservists. 
104 Airwave will be replaced in due course by the Emergency Services Network mobile 
communications programme.
110
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

a. Initial reconnaissance. The rapid assessment of general civilian 
infrastructure and routes. This form of reconnaissance is sufficient 
to establish whether Defence capability can meet the task required 
and to determine the level of damage that has been sustained. Initial 
reconnaissance output is likely to include a site sketch and potential 
courses of action.
b. Detailed infrastructure reconnaissance. The Royal Engineers 
have Chartered Engineers in all disciplines (civil, electrical and 
mechanical) that can conduct detailed technical reconnaissance on 
damaged and/or at-risk infrastructure. The output from such activity will 
routinely be a complete, detailed design report.
c. Dive reconnaissance. The Royal Engineers diving capability can 
conduct underwater reconnaissance, construction and demolition tasks.
4.24. Survey and mapping. The Royal Engineers can survey and provide 
mapping of the UK land mass at short notice. This capability includes a 
comprehensive geospatial capability with associated production facilities that 
can deploy and operate in austere locations if required. The Royal Navy does 
the same in the maritime environment, where it is called a ‘rapid environmental 
assessment’.
4.25. Planning and design. All Royal Engineers units can assist joint regional 
liaison officers (JRLOs) with resilience planning advice to local authorities 
and other government departments. Deployment of Royal Engineers 
advisers to work alongside JRLOs during major incidents has proved highly 
advantageous. Mobile, detailed design capability can deploy forward to assist 
civilian authorities where required; this includes the initial reconnaissance skill 
sets and draughtsmen.
4.26. Construction. Royal Engineers capability may be used in rapid repair 
and access tasks where temporary military solutions can deliver critical 
access for emergency services and evacuation, or to conduct emergency 
infrastructure repair. Much of the military equipment, such as bridging assets, 
may not be suitable for general use by civilians during the recovery phase 
because they do not comply with local authority health and safety standards.
4.27 . Demolition. The Royal Engineers possesses the ability to conduct 
explosive demolitions. Whilst unusual, this capability has been used in the past 
but can only be deployed where there is absolute necessity.
111
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

4.28. Rapid runway clearance. The RAF maintain a specialist team at high 
readiness to provide rapid runway clearance. Capabilities comprise specialist 
aircraft lifting and towing expertise, aircraft cutting skills and aircraft hazard 
management.
UK standby battalions
4.29. The British Army maintains three UKSBs at extremely high readiness to 
support UK operations. Assigned geographic areas of responsibility, the UKSBs 
provide Defence with a generalist force of choice to support civil authorities 
in response to a disruptive challenge or similar event.105 Since the UKSBs 
were established in 2011, UKSBs have completed diverse resilience roles, 
including industrial action mitigation, flood mitigation activities on a number of 
operations, and testing haulage drivers in the vicinity of the Channel ports during 
the COVID-19 pandemic in late 2020. In addition, the UKSBs are assigned to 
support the police with specific security operations in the UK.
4.30. Once activated and deployed, the UKSBs are held under the 
operational command of the Standing Joint Commander (United Kingdom) 
(SJC(UK)). UKSBs have the following characteristics:
• they are agile and can plug into civil authority systems;
• they are adaptable and scalable force packages able to deploy large 
numbers of trained, disciplined, Defence personnel to a wide range of 
roles;106
• they have up-to-date situational awareness of the UK joint operations 
area; and
• they have self-contained logistics allowing them to sustain 
themselves for 48 hours anywhere in the UK.
4.31. On a routine basis UKSBs, in conjunction with the Environment 
Agency, undertake familiarisation in constructing Environment Agency-owned 
temporary flood barriers, which can be erected rapidly when required. When 
deployed operationally, Environment Agency staff will always be present on 
site, providing direction and oversight.
105 Comprising: North (Northern England (approximately north of the Mersey to Humber 
estuaries), Scotland and Northern Ireland); and South 1 and South 2 (south of the Mersey 
to Humber estuary line). When circumstances require it, the UKSBs can operate outside 
their assigned areas of responsibility.
106 Ranging from an eight-person section to the entire UKSB of around 400 personnel.
112
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Fleet ready escort
4.32. The Royal Navy maintains a vessel in the UK marine area at 24 hours’ 
notice to move. The crew are trained in a range of areas, including general 
MACA and counterterrorism. 
Sustainment
4.33. All three Services can sustain their forces to maintain the necessary level 
of operational activity for the required duration. This could include, but is not 
limited to, real life support, protective equipment, transport and medical support. 
Importantly, deployed personnel would not need to draw on local resources that 
may be required by the local authority or population, such as food or fuel. Real 
life support for UK operations comprises catering (including field catering) and 
accommodation facilities (field showers, deployed laundry facilities, and so on). 
Medical
4.34. Defence maintains a health and medical capability that in certain 
circumstances may be able to assist with MACA. All military personnel receive 
a level of basic first aid and combat casualty care training for the purpose of 
immediate life-saving response to injuries sustained on operations or exercise. 
This training is designed for military purposes and whilst providing skills for self 
and buddy care within military teams, it has limited utility in a civilian context. 
113
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means
Defence can help medical services in times of crisis

4.35. The Defence Medical Services (DMS) maintains military health care 
services, such as primary health care and rehabilitation within the firm base 
and deployable medical capability for support to operations and overseas 
activity. Capabilities include force health protection, pre-hospital emergency 
care, deployed hospital care and medical evacuation. DMS personnel are 
employed across a range of health care professions, as well as trained 
non-vocational military medical technicians and assistants. 
Operation Rescript – medical support in response to the  
COVID-19 pandemic
During 2020–21, Defence was called upon in several guises to support the 
national response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Early in the pandemic Defence 
provided generalist support to plan and run mobile testing facilities across 
the UK. In doing so, Defence proved the concept of these mobile testing 
units, ensuring the system in place was viable before handing the routine 
running over to a contractor. 
More specialist medical capability was provided to assist in the vaccination 
programme by establishing a vaccination quick reaction force. This 
vaccination force, staffed with Service personnel who were not committed 
to the National Health Service (NHS), helped administer an estimated 64,800 
vaccines over four months in support of public health. 
Other specialist assistance included providing combat medical technicians 
to the NHS across six integrated care systems in the south east. In this 
instance, trained medical staff were deployed to support wards, discharge 
units and emergency departments. They carried out critical care and 
interventions such as non-invasive ventilation. 
These are only a few of the many examples of Defence assistance under 
Operation Rescript during this period, but they demonstrate some of the 
diverse tasks that Defence can take on.  
4.36. Assistance to MACA may be where an aspect of the NHS107 is in crisis 
and under pressure to meet demand, or where a situation would benefit from 
specific military medical expertise or equipment and contracted provision 
cannot be provided due to the urgency of the situation, in line with MACA 
107 Inclusive of devolved administrations’ NHS organisations.
114
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

principles. Examples include providing military personnel to uplift NHS staff, 
establishing field medical treatment facilities, providing medical teams to 
operate in hazardous environments or advising on specialist areas such 
as mass casualty management, disease outbreaks, chemical, biological, 
radiological and explosive injuries, medical logistics and the provision of care in 
hostile and austere conditions.
4.37. Some medical capability is embedded within front line command units 
and are tasked for MACA within Defence operational priorities in the usual 
manner. However, many Regular and Reserve DMS personnel routinely work 
within the NHS. The deployment or mobilisation of these staff on a MACA 
task must be in liaison with the relevant NHS Trust, NHS of the devolved 
administration or Department for Health and Social Care (DHSC) to reconcile 
the local impact to the NHS of losing (or relocating) that capability.
Transport
4.38. Defence maintains an array of transport that is able to operate on 
water, land and in the air, to move both people and materiel to where they are 
needed. This capability has wide utility when supporting MACA, including the 
rapid movement of military forces and specialist equipment into an area and, in 
extremis, to help evacuate civilians away from a place of danger or threat. The 
SPO Directorate will approach the appropriate single-Service tasking authority to 
task transport in support of MACA. Each Service contributes to this capability.
a. Royal Navy. The Royal Navy’s transport includes ships, maritime 
helicopters (adapted to use over water), patrol boats and small boats 
(rigid inflatable boats) capable of operating in the open ocean and 
the littoral (including inland waterways). Within the Royal Navy, the 
Royal Marines provide landing craft and amphibious vehicles that can 
lift vehicles, personnel and equipment. The Royal Marines also have 
vehicles that can wade in deep water.
b. British Army. The British Army’s transport includes bulk 
equipment and personnel lift vehicles, small boats and helicopters.
c. Royal Air Force. The RAF’s transport includes bulk equipment 
and personnel lift vehicles, mechanical handling equipment and heavy 
equipment transporters for use on the land, and a range of aircraft, 
including helicopters which can rapidly move personnel and materiel 
around the UK.
115
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Delivering oxygen to hospitals during Operation Rescript,  
March to April 2020
In late March 2020, during the initial phases of Operation Rescript, a request 
was received from DHSC for the military to provide support to reinforce and 
guarantee the continuity of the supply of oxygen into NHS hospitals. At that 
time, demand for oxygen was rising not only due to increased use within 
established hospital facilities, but also to equip the emerging Nightingale 
facilities. DHSC’s specific request was for support in the form of qualified 
tanker drivers to meet this additional demand and mitigate anticipated civilian 
and commercial sector staff shortages caused through illness and enforced 
self-isolation.
Working with the two largest suppliers of medical oxygen in the UK, Defence 
fuels experts from HQ SJC(UK) designed a training programme to rapidly 
re-role elements of the Operation Escalin (Defence’s role in ensuring the UK’s 
fuel distribution) cadre of trained fuel tanker drivers. Upon completing this 
mission-specific training, Defence personnel deployed to undertake 39 days 
of driving effort, supplying hospitals throughout England and Wales, whilst 
the headquarters continued to support an industry-led solution, matching 
suitably-qualified civilian drivers from allied industries (whose own work had 
been suspended due to the pandemic) with the requirement of this task. 
Costs for this support were recovered in line with the broader Operation 
Rescript approach.
116
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Defence estate 
4.39. The MOD owns and operates a diverse estate totalling 452,000 
hectares, making it one of the largest landowners in the UK.108 Defence’s 
estate comprises:
• training areas;
• firing ranges;
• transit camps;
• naval bases;
• army barracks;
• airfields;
• Service families’ accommodation; and
• Defence facilities.
4.40. Top level budget (TLB) holders are responsible for their infrastructure 
and will need to be consulted before any Defence estate can be released 
for a MACA operation. The Defence Infrastructure Organisation (DIO) is 
responsible for providing advice and delivering services in support of Defence 
infrastructure. To assess the full impact of any operation on infrastructure, 
advice will have to be sought from both the TLB holder and DIO. 
4.41. During an emergency, or when planning for a major national event, 
early consideration should be given to the potential use of Defence’s estate. 
This may include forward mounting assets (both Defence and civil authorities), 
temporary accommodation for personnel, catering services (both on and off 
site), and storage for equipment and materiel. Early engagement with the DIO 
military liaison officer, Reserve Forces and Cadets Association and respective 
TLB holders through the SPO Directorate will confirm that the required 
Defence estate, and the infrastructure present is available, properly authorised 
for use, fit for the intended purpose, and that the suggested activity can be 
supported through existing contracts with MOD industry partners.109 While 
heads of establishment command individual sites, they are not considered 
infrastructure specialists. In all such instances, and prior to a plan being 
enacted, advice and guidance should be sought from the local DIO site 
representative.
108 This equates to 1.8% of the total UK land mass.
109 While general principles of cost recovery apply to resilience and security operations, 
MOD industry partners who supply services outside the scope of their contract will 
invariably seek to recover additional costs from civil authorities.
117
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

4.42. Rationalisation of Defence’s estate will lead to a 30% reduction in  
built estate by 2040.110 This may impact longer-term civil authority  
emergency/major incident contingency plans. On a case-by-case basis, 
where Defence estate is used to support longer-term contingency 
plans, a memorandum of understanding or memorandum of temporary 
occupation may be required. The SPO Directorate will lead on drawing up 
the memorandum of understanding, supported by MOD legal advisers, in 
conjunction with the relevant legal department of the civil authority. Together 
they will draft such memoranda to formalise arrangements (for example, clarify 
payment for services, terms of occupancy and financial/legal liabilities).
Operation Trelawny – Security operation in support of the  
G7 Summit in St Ives, June 2021
The UK’s presidency of the Group of Seven nations (G7) saw the body’s 
annual summit take place in the Carbis Bay resort near St Ives in Cornwall. 
A significant enhancement was required to existing facilities at the resort 
and elsewhere to allow the G7 Summit to take place. As part of the wider 
police-led security plan, all vehicles entering the G7 venues required 
screening by police and security staff at a remote vehicle search site (RVSS) 
at Hayle Rugby Club. However, one week before the Summit took place  
it was discovered that the Hayle RVSS could not accommodate light and 
heavy goods vehicles (HGVs); this resulted in a serious but unexpected 
security issue. 
Through the RAF Regional Liaison Officer (RAFRLO) for the south 
west, Defence was able to offer an alternate solution to the Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) in the form of RAF 
Portreath, a military radar site near the venue. The site was surveyed by the 
FCDO’s contractor, supported by Devon and Cornwall Police, seven days 
before the start of the G7 Summit, followed by a rapid build and test. The 
JRLO and RAFRLO were instrumental in progressing the use of the site under 
a DIO licence as the most expedient method of assuring access to the site 
as well as payment to the MOD. The RVSS was built midweek and became 
operational by the required deadline, allowing over 90 HGVs to be searched 
and sealed enabling them to safely enter the Summit venues and offload the 
equipment needed to support the international event.
110 Defence estate is divided between rural estate (training areas/firing ranges) and built 
estate (naval bases/airfields/barracks) on a ratio of 83% to 17% respectively.
118
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Counter-chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
4.43. In the event of an incident involving CBRN activity, Defence can bring 
together a counter-CBRN response from military and scientific agencies in 
consultation with the civil authorities. Details of this response are beyond the 
classification of this publication.
Operation Morlop – Nerve agent attack in Salisbury
On 4 March 2018, a former Russian intelligence officer, Sergei Skripal, and 
his daughter, Yulia, were discovered unconscious in the centre of Salisbury 
having been poisoned by Novichok nerve agent. As the counterterrorism 
investigation progressed, it became clear that a trail of the deadly nerve 
agent had spread from the original point of poisoning at the Skripal’s 
residence and subsequently across the city and beyond. Responding to a 
MACA request from the Counterterrorism Command for military support, 
180 personnel deployed to initially help the investigation by preventing the 
spread of the agent and then, in support of the Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) as the lead government department, 
remediate any items including vehicles, buildings or areas that may have 
been contaminated. These specialists came from across Defence including: 
20 (Defence CBRN) Wing, RAF Regiment; 29 Explosive Ordnance Disposal 
and Search Group; Falcon Squadron, Royal Tank Regiment; and from the 
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (Dstl). On 30 June 2018, Dawn 
Sturgess and Charlie Rowley were found poisoned by the same nerve agent 
at a property in Amesbury, some seven miles away, generating a similar 
response from the military.
Operation Morlop supported the Home Office investigation and the Defra 
remediation – often simultaneously which required deconfliction of the 
competing demands from both government departments, removing 
36 vehicles, cleaning 12 complex sites, taking 7 ,200 analytical samples 
and spending over 13,000 hours in CBRN personal protective equipment. 
Marginal costs were charged for support to the investigation whilst full costs 
were charged for the remediation work. The military element of the task was 
closed on 1 March 2019 after 356 days on task.
119
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Fire and rescue
4.44. Defence Fire and Rescue (DFR) is Defence’s professional fire and 
rescue capability, primarily in support of Defence airfields. DFR units are based 
throughout the UK, often in geographically remote locations. 
4.45. Under MACA immediate assistance arrangements, DFR111 assets 
can respond to life-threatening incidents when local authority fire and rescue 
services are unable to provide an effective and timely life-saving response.112 
Following normal MACA arrangements, DFR units may respond to support 
local authority fire and rescue services and national resilience assets, and/or 
be requested to attend major incidents or emergencies to provide specialist 
advice on using DFR capability. The DFR duty officer acts as the focal point 
for advice and requests for both assistance and attendance. Except for 
responding to natural disaster events where life is at risk, or there is a need 
to alleviate distress or to protect significant property, the deployment of DFR 
assets will remain subject to ministerial authorisation.
111 DFR remain the service provider for the fire and rescue provision to Defence. The 
DFR service has a contract with Capita to meet part of this requirement. Irrespective of the 
capability used, all MACA requests must be made through Headquarters DFR. 
112 Any support to the local authority fire and rescue services will depend on the capacity 
of the DFR unit to maintain its primary output in support of flying operations.
120
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means
The Royal Navy maintains a fire and rescue capability for its own vessels

4.46. The Royal Navy maintains a maritime fire and rescue capability for its 
own vessels. In certain circumstances this capability may be used to assist in 
MACA. 
Non-specialist capability
4.47. When responding to major incidents and emergencies and planning 
for national events, Defence may need to consider deploying large numbers 
of non-specialist personnel to support the civil authorities across a wide 
area or multiple locations. This was the case during Operation Pitchpole 
in 2014 (Defence’s support to flooding across much of southern England) 
and Operation Olympics in 2012. The Defence contribution may comprise 
personnel from formed units and non-formed units.
a. Formed units. Formed units have the advantage of deploying with 
established command chains and potentially organic communications, 
logistics and mobility.
b. Non-formed units. Non-formed unit personnel are classified in 
military terms as individual augmentees, who are drawn from across a 
single Service. They form together for the duration of the task, under a 
nominated command chain/structure and are reliant on external military 
formations for real life support, logistics and mobility. SPO Directorate 
staff work closely with the single-Service commands and Strategic 
Command during the force generation of non-specialist personnel to 
ensure they are not overmatched by the task.
Section 2 – Education and training
Training governance
4.48. The SPO Directorate is the strategic lead for UK operations training 
and exercising within Defence. Direction and guidance are provided annually 
through the Training Management Group mechanism, with representation from 
across Defence.113 The Training Management Group’s remit is to coordinate all 
Defence resilience and UK operations training and exercising.
113 Representatives from: the SPO Directorate; HQ SJC(UK); single-Service commands; 
and Defence agencies/organisations (for example, Dstl and the Atomic Weapons 
Establishment (AWE).
121
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

4.49. Within Defence, HQ SJC(UK) provides the operational-level, land-based 
lead for resilience and UK operations education, training and exercising. The 
Royal Navy conducts its own resilience training and exercises. Direction is 
issued annually through the HQ SJC(UK) training and exercising directive. 
The HQ SJC(UK) fulfils the Joint Service Training Requirement Authority for 
all resilience individual education and training. Moreover, HQ SJC(UK) is 
responsible for programming and supervising resilience exercises across 
Defence.
4.50. At the Defence tactical level, the British Army’s Headquarters Regional 
Command (HQ RC) serves as the single-Service Training Delivery Authority 114 
for all resilience and UK operations activities.115 HQ RC assists HQ SJC(UK) 
develop, programme and resource training, helped by the single-Service 
commands. The British Army’s RPoCs provide the focal point for resilience 
training with civil authorities at the regional and local level.
Working with other government departments
4.51. Defence is not listed as a categorised responder under the Civil 
Contingencies Act 2004. However, although not a statutory requirement, 
Defence conducts resilience training with the civil authorities across a range of 
scenarios and in a number of formats that include: 
• table top exercises;
• command post exercises;
• field training exercises; and
• study and briefing days.
4.52. Lead government departments are responsible for their internal 
resilience training and exercising, but cross-government resilience training 
and exercising is coordinated and supported by the Civil Contingencies 
Secretariat. Within the SPO Directorate, the UK Operations Team provides 
the MOD’s input to this. When invited and appropriate, the MOD will support 
all cross-government resilience exercises, from national to local level. At the 
114 JSP 822 also states that the Training Development Authority must be distinct from the 
Training Requirement Authority and is the organisation responsible for training delivery, but 
not always for the actual training itself.
115 Except for specialist activity such as EOD.
122
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

national level, this includes Tier 1 and Tier 2 exercises, while at the local level 
this will likely comprise RPoC headquarters or sub-units supporting local 
resilience forum exercises/training events.
Multi-agency gold incident command course, Derby, June 2021
On an annual basis the MOD directs the HQ SJC(UK) in its capacity as 
Defence’s Joint Training Requirements Authority for resilience training to 
design and deliver an extensive programme of individual resilience training. 
HQ SJC(UK) is further tasked to oversee the British Army’s HQ RC’s delivery 
of biennial resilience mission rehearsal exercises (MRXs), assuring the 
ability of the British Army’s RPoC to plan and conduct resilience operations 
in support of the civil authorities. With regards to individual training, in 
addition to a programme of internally delivered training for Defence resilience 
practitioners, HQ SJC(UK) directs the attendance of MOD personnel on civil 
authority training courses, such as the College of Policing’s multi-agency 
gold incident command (MAGIC) course, which is designed to prepare senior 
emergency services personnel for the challenges of command in response to 
disruptive challenges in the UK. 
123
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Training categories
4.53. Defence resilience training comprises three categories: 
• education; 
• individual training; and 
• collective training. 
Annex 4A provides an outline of each training category.
4.54. The underlying cost recovery principle that will be applied is that 
Defence support to civil authority-led training events may be charged at 
marginal cost or waived altogether. HQ SJC(UK) issues direction when 
required; clarification/advice should be sought by the requesting civil 
authorities from the JRLO in the first instance.116
116 Royal Navy regional liaison officers (RNRLOs) and RAFRLOs are equally able to 
provide direction and guidance.
124
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

 
Key points
• SPO Directorate staff work closely with single-Service commands to identify 
the best-placed Defence capability to support a request.
• Defence maintains a joint, rapidly deployable EOD&S capability to counter 
threats from explosive ordnance hazards.
• Defence ISR capability provides situational awareness, upon which timely 
and effective decisions and plans can be made.
• Defence planning staffs are well-versed, trained and practised in the 
principles of planning to meet specific strategic objectives.
• Defence can provide a command and control capability to complement and 
support the civil authorities during an incident or when planning for a major 
national event.
• Military engineers offer a wide breadth of engineering capability that can be 
used on resilience operations in support of the civil authorities.
• The UKSBs are held at extremely high readiness and provide generalist 
support to UK operations.
• Early consideration should be given to the potential use of Defence estate in 
consultation with the DIO to support MACA.
• In the event of an incident involving CBRN activity, Defence can bring 
together a counter-CBRN response from military and scientific agencies in 
consultation with civil authorities.
• Defence conducts resilience training with the civil authorities on a range of 
scenarios.
125
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4
Delivery: means

Annex 4A
Categories of Defence 
training
Education
Title Description Sponsor/delivery
Cross-government 
briefing day
Aim: educate non-military government 
audiences on how and what Defence 
contributes to resilience in the UK.
Audience: ministers, civil servants from 
lead government departments.
Activity: briefing day/twice a year.
Sponsor: MOD’s 
SPO Directorate – UK 
Operations Team
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK)
Devolved 
government to 
local-level MACA 
briefing and 
awareness days
Aim: educate key non-Defence 
personnel in devolved administrations 
down to the local level on how and 
what Defence contributes to resilience 
in the UK, focused especially on their 
area of responsibility.
Audience: ministers, civil servants from 
lead government departments.
Activity: briefing day/four times a year.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK)
supported by Defence 
regional liaison officers 
as required
Defence 
contribution to 
resilience course – 
Level 3
Aim: educate a Defence audience 
on MACA in the UK responding to a 
disruptive challenge at the national, 
devolved administration and regional 
levels.
Audience: middle/senior ranked 
Defence personnel, uniformed and 
non-uniformed, with a resilience role.
Activity: two-day residential course/six 
times a year.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK)
126
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4A
Delivery: means

Title Description Sponsor/delivery
Defence 
contribution to 
resilience course – 
Level 2
Aim: educate a Defence audience on 
MACA in the UK responding to a range 
of disruptive challenges but specific to 
a region.
Audience: military personnel from the 
three Services with a resilience role.
Activity: one-and-a-half-day course/at 
least annually.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: RPoC 
supported by RNRLOs 
and RAFRLOs
Individual training
Title Description Sponsor/delivery
Counterterrorist 
training
Aim: prepare a Defence audience for 
specific counterterrorism operations. 
Audience: Defence personnel from 
the Royal Navy, British Army and 
RAF assigned to counterterrorism 
operations.
Activity: rigorous training to ensure 
Defence personnel meet the exacting 
operational standards required by the 
UK government and police.
Sponsor: MOD’s 
SPO Directorate – UK 
Operations Team
Delivery: units 
assigned to the specific 
counterterrorism 
operation
Miscellaneous There remains a regular requirement 
to deliver focused, occasionally 
operation-specific, training and 
education to a wide range of Defence 
and non-Defence audiences. 
Objectives and content will be 
determined on a case-by-case basis.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK)
Royal Navy Unit 
Training
Aim: train and exercise Royal Navy 
units in disaster relief and MACA.
Audience: Royal Navy units. 
Activity: training at Fleet Operational 
Sea Training/building on individual 
training.
Sponsor: Navy 
Command 
Delivery: Fleet 
Operational Sea 
Training.
127
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4A
Delivery: means

Collective training – generic
Title Description Sponsor/delivery
Study days Aim: educate/exercise operational-level and 
formation headquarters in their resilience 
role.
Audience: military operational-level and 
formation headquarters staff.
Activity: raise awareness through briefings/
seminars of a scenario drawn from the 
National Security Risk Assessment. 
HQ SJC(UK)/RPoC will each conduct at 
least one study day per annum.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK)/
RPoC
Other events Aim: raise awareness/educate Defence 
personnel on civil authority resilience 
capabilities and roles.
Audience: Defence personnel, usually 
drawn from HQ SJC(UK), RPoC, regional 
liaison officers and UKSBs.
Activity: support to/participate in civil 
authorities running field/live exercises.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK), 
RPoC and/or UKSB
Resilience 
MRX
Aim: assess the ability of RPoC 
headquarters to plan and conduct 
operations in support of civil authorities in 
the UK.
Audience: RPoC headquarters staffs – 
whole force approach (Regulars, Reservists, 
civil servants and contractors).
Activity: MRXs are planned, prepared 
and delivered by HQ RC staff and last 
usually for up to five days. MRXs are 
preceded by a defined programme of 
preparatory events and exercises, including 
planning conferences and a two-day long 
preparatory procedural exercise designed 
to practise RPoC staffs in planning and 
conduct of UK operations.117 
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: HQ RC
117 RPoC will run one unassured exercise in the years in which a formal resilience MRX is not 
conducted.
128
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4A
Delivery: means

Collective training – mission specific
Title Description Sponsor/delivery
Scenario specific 
training
Aim: analyse and refine a Defence 
response to a specific scenario/event.
Audience: Defence personnel from 
RPoC, UKSB or a unit assigned a 
resilience role.
Activity: multi-agency table top 
exercise/command post exercise/field 
training exercise based on a scenario 
likely drawn from the National Security 
Risk Assessment.
Sponsor: MOD’s 
SPO Directorate – UK 
Operations Team
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK)/ 
RPoC
Rehearsal of 
concept drills
Aim: rehearse impending security/
resilience operation prior to 
deployment.
Audience: key unit commanders and 
staff with responsibility for executing 
the plan. If able to, this should include 
multi-agency representation.
Activity: end-to-end review and 
confirmation of the prepared plan; 
ideally this should have multi-agency 
participation to aid understanding.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: HQ SJC(UK)/ 
unit assigned to the 
contingency operation 
(for example, UKSB)
All ranks briefings Aim: inform/update a Defence 
audience assigned to a contingency 
operation in support of the civil 
authorities.
Audience: Defence personnel assigned 
to a specific contingency operation in 
support of the civil authorities.
Activity: either immediately prior 
to deployment, or by standard 
arrangement a structured brief 
explaining the situation, MACA policy, 
role and likely tasks.
Sponsor: HQ SJC(UK)
Delivery: unit assigned 
to the contingency 
operation (for example, 
UKSB)
129
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4A
Delivery: means

Notes
130
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
4A
Delivery: means

Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
ACSA  Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Arrangement
AJP  Allied joint publication
AOC 11 Gp Air Officer Commanding 11 Group
AP  Air Publication
APCM  aircraft post-crash management
AWE  Atomic Weapons Establishment
BEIS  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
CBRN  chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
CBRNe  chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear and explosives
CCA 04 Civil Contingencies Act 2004
CCD  Civil Contingencies Division
CCG (NI) Civil Contingencies Group (Northern Ireland)
CCS  Civil Contingencies Secretariat
CDS  Chief of the Defence Staff
CIS  communication and information systems
CNI  critical national infrastructure
COBR  Cabinet Office Briefing Room
COBR (M) Cabinet Office Briefing Room (Ministerial)
COMOPS Commander Operations
C-UAS  counter-unmanned aircraft system
DCDC  Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
DCMS  Digital, Culture, Media and Sport
DE&S  Defence Equipment and Support 
DefCNI  Defence critical national infrastructure
Defra  Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
DfE  Department for Education
DFR  Defence Fire and Rescue 
DHSC  Department for Health and Social Care
DIO  Defence Infrastructure Organisation
DLUHC  Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities 
DMS  Defence Medical Services
131
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon

DNEO  Defence Nuclear Emergency Organisation
DNO  Defence Nuclear Organisation
DOC  departmental operations cell
Dstl  Defence Science and Technology Laboratory
EA  Environment Agency
EOD  explosive ordnance disposal
EOD&S  explosive ordnance disposal and search 
EPG  emergency preparedness group
FCDO  Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
G7  Group of Seven
HGV  heavy goods vehicle
HM  Her Majesty’s 
HQ RC  Headquarters Regional Command
HQ SJC(UK) Headquarters Standing Joint Command (United Kingdom)
HSE  Health and Safety Executive
IMG  Information Manoeuvre Group
ISR  intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
JARTS  Joint Aircraft Recovery and Transportation Squadron 
JDP  joint doctrine publication
JESIP  Joint Emergency Services Interoperability Principles 
JMC CIS Joint Military Commander Communications Informations  
  Systems
JMC  joint military commander
JMC NI  Joint Military Commander Northern Ireland
JMOCC Joint Maritime Operations Coordination Centre
JRLO  joint regional liaison officer
JSP  joint Service publication
LGD  lead government department
LIPD  Logistics Implementation Policy Document 
LOC  lines of communication
LRF  local resilience forum
LRP  local resilience partnership
MACA  military aid to the civil authorities
132
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon

MACR  Major Accident Control Regulations
MAGIC  multi-agency gold incident command
MAIB  Marine Accident Investigation Branch
MCA  MOD Coordinating Authority
MLO  military liaison officer
MOC  Maritime Operations Centre
MOD  Ministry of Defence
MoJ  Ministry of Justice
MRS  [RAF] Mountain Rescue Service
MRX  mission rehearsal exercise
MSMO  military support to the mounting of operations
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NHS  National Health Service
NIO  Northern Ireland Office
NMIC  National Maritime Information Centre
NRC  naval regional commander
ODCR  observation, discussion, conclusion, recommendation
Ofcom  Office of Communications
PSNI  Police Service of Northern Ireland
RAF  Royal Air Force
RAFRLO Royal Air Force regional liaison officer
RFCA  Reserve Forces and Cadets Association
RLO  regional liaison officer 
RNRLO  Royal Navy regional liaison officer 
RPoC  regional point of command
RRP  regional resilience partnership
RSD  Reserve Service Days
RVSS  remote vehicle search site
SAGE  Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies
SALMO  specialist team for salvage and maritime operations 
SAR  search and rescue
SCG  strategic coordinating group 
SGoRR  Scottish Government Resilience Room
SJC(UK) Standing Joint Commander (United Kingdom)
SPO  Security Policy and Operations 
133
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon

TLB  top level budget
UK  United Kingdom
UKSB  UK standby battalion
UNCLOS United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
US  United States
VAT  value added tax
 
134
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon

Section 2 – Terms and definitions
This section is divided into two parts. First, we list terms and their descriptions 
that are used as reference for this publication only. Second, we list endorsed 
terms and their definitions which may be helpful to the reader.
Definitions used for reference in this publication only
emergency (or disruptive challenge) 
An emergency (or disruptive challenge) as defined in the Civil Contingencies 
Act 2004 is a situation or series of events that threatens or causes serious 
damage to human welfare, the environment or security in the United Kingdom. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Central Government Arrangements for Responding to an 
Emergency, 2010) 
hazard 
Accidental or naturally occurring (i.e. non-malicious) event or situation with the 
potential to cause death or physical or psychological harm, damage or losses 
to property, and/or disruption to the environment and/or to economic, social 
and political structures. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013)
indemnity 
Security against or exemption from legal responsibility for one’s actions. 
(Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 12th Edition, 2011)
lead government department 
Department of the UK government or devolved administration designated 
as responsible for overall management of the government response to an 
emergency or disaster. There are lead government departments identified for 
both the response and recovery phases of emergencies. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013)
liability 
A thing for which someone is liable, especially a financial obligation.  
(Concise Oxford English Dictionary, 12th Edition, 2011)
major incident 
Event or situation requiring a response under one or more of the emergency 
services major incident plans. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013)
135
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon

recovery 
The process of rebuilding, restoring and rehabilitating the community following 
an emergency. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013)
resilience 
Ability of the community, services, area or infrastructure to detect, prevent, 
and, if necessary, to withstand, handle and recover from disruptive challenges. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013)
response 
Decisions and actions taken in accordance with the strategic, tactical and 
operational objectives defined by the emergency responders. At a high level 
these will be to protect life, contain and mitigate the impacts of an emergency 
and create the condition for a return to normality. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013)
risk 
Measure of the significance of a potential emergency in terms of its assessed 
likelihood and impact. 
(Cabinet Office, UK Civil Protection Lexicon, Version 2.1.1, February 2013)
The UK Civil Protection Lexicon can be accessed via the Gov.uk website.
Endorsed definitions
military aid to the civil authorities 
Military operations conducted in the UK and Crown Dependencies involving 
the employment of Defence resources as requested by a government 
department or civil authority.  
Note: These operations are subject to Defence Ministerial approval, either prior 
to, or at the time of an event, except in immediate risk of life situations. 
(JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm)
notice to move 
A warning order that specifies the time given to a unit or headquarters to be 
ready to deploy.  
Note: This order normally precedes an order to move and may increase or 
decrease the time to prepare. (NATOTerm)
136
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon

readiness 
The period of time measured from an initiation order to the moment when the 
headquarters or unit is ready to perform its task from its peacetime location 
(permanent or forward) deployed or ready for deployment. 
(JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm)
security 
The condition achieved when designated information, materiel, personnel, 
activities and installations are protected against espionage, sabotage, 
subversion, terrorism and damage, as well as against loss or unauthorized 
disclosure. (NATOTerm) 
Note: whilst this NATO definition of security is wide ranging, this JDP explains 
Defence activities in support of the civil authorities in the UK responding to 
disruptive challenges identified by the Cabinet Office.
137
JDP 02 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2021Crown copyright 2021
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc


