Joint Doctrine Publication 0-20UK Land PowerSixth Edition
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-20 
UK Land Power
Sixth Edition

[Page 2: No extractable text]

i
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-20
UK Land Power
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-20 (JDP 0-20) (6th Edition),  
dated October 2023, is promulgated as directed 
by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre

ii
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via email at: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk 
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2023) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated).
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbey Wood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk 
Distribution
All DCDC publications can be demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and 
Operations Centre. 
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet (RLI) at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/IntranetUKStratCom/SitePages/
development-concepts-and-doctrine-centre-dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

iii
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Foreword
 
Competition between peoples has been a consistent theme of human 
experience. Since it is on the land that people live, and where political decisions 
are made, the ability to exert decisive control and influence on land is of central 
importance to the resolution of differences. Land power is thus an indispensable 
component of military and national power, offering policy-makers scalable and 
responsive options with which to protect national interests and, if deterrence 
fails, to fight adversaries. The defining role of land forces is, therefore, to fight 
on land in support of national policy. As a disciplined and adaptable workforce, 
land forces can also be used for other purposes, but these are subsidiary to 
their prime purpose – preparing for and fighting wars.
‘Armies are of paramount importance in warfare because they are the main 
military instrument for conquering and controlling land, which is the supreme 
political objective in a world of territorial states.’
      Professor John Mearsheimer
The British Army is the chief Service advocate for military activity on land, but 
warfighting on land is not purely the business of the Army. The conduct of 
armed conflict presents a number of enduring problems which, throughout 
history, have found temporary solutions by the exploitation of technology. 
Indeed, from the late 18th Century onwards, land warfare has experienced 
the effects of relatively rapid technological advances in the military use of the 
sea, air, the electromagnetic spectrum, space, and cyberspace. Today, military 
activity on land is increasingly, and critically, dependent on the capabilities of 
the other operational domains.
The Army must, therefore, both advocate for warfighting capability on, and 
from, the land and cohere the effects created by the other domains in pursuit 
of military strategy in the land environment. The first task demands integration, 
creating a common understanding of adversary strengths and weaknesses, 
so that the whole force can converge capabilities to a common purpose; the 
second demands orchestration – cohering tactical activities to meet strategic 
aims. This combination of integration and orchestration in the land domain is 
called convergence: coordinating effects in support of land tactical activities, 
wheresoever those effects are created.

iv
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-20, UK Land Power, describes the context, 
utility, and application of land power in terms of joint and multinational 
operations. It recognises that the nature of war remains constant: it is friction, 
political, human and violent. As doctrine, JDP 0-20 captures a set of principles 
that underpin how land forces practice their profession. It has been written 
primarily for joint staffs, officials, allies and partners in industry. I encourage 
you to read it as a framework for understanding how land forces perform their 
vital role in protecting our nation.
 
Chief of the General Staff

v
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Preface
Purpose
1. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-20, UK Land Power is the UK’s keystone 
land doctrine. Whilst JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, provides the broad 
philosophy and principles underpinning the use of our Armed Forces as a 
whole, JDP 0-20 is focused specifically on UK land power. It provides an 
understanding of land power, placing it in its appropriate context. JDP 0-20 
also explores land power’s increasing reliance on capabilities that enable land 
forces to operate on land and its interdependence with the other elements 
of national and military power, as well as multinational and private sector 
partners. Finally, JDP 0-20 also considers, in broad terms, those factors that 
enable the effective employment of land power.  
Context
2. JDP 0-20 describes the nature and application of UK land power. The land 
environment is distinguished by the fact that it is where people predominantly 
live. As a result, it is in the land environment that the roots of conflict are most 
usually found and tends to be where conflicts and disputes are finally decided. 
Underpinned by this approach, the employment of UK land power is highly 
significant to national security and prosperity.
Audience
3. We commend JDP 0-20, UK Land Power to all our partners as a simple 
and concise explanation of UK land power. JDP 0-20 should be of value 
to joint commanders and staffs, single-Service warfare branches, other 
government departments, partners and allies.
Structure
4. JDP 0-20 is divided into four chapters with a supporting lexicon. 
a. Chapter 1 – An introduction to UK land power. Chapter 1 defines 
and explains land power, describing how UK land power is adapted to 
provide wide-ranging strategic utility.

vi
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
b. Chapter 2 – Land power in context. Chapter 2 provides an overview 
of the context in which UK land power is employed. The chapter outlines 
the factors that shape the land environment, as well as explaining the 
concept of the enduring nature and changing character of conflict. It 
also describes the key aspects that shape the contemporary operating 
environment.
c. Chapter 3 – The foundations of land power. Chapter 3 outlines the 
enduring attributes, required qualities and philosophy of land forces. It 
also explains the concept of fighting power and the three tenets of land 
doctrine: the manoeuvrist approach, mission command and combined 
arms.
d. Chapter 4 – Employing UK land power. Chapter 4 examines 
the operational themes of UK land power, their application in the 
contemporary operating environment, as well as its integration with the 
other operational  domains.
Linkages
5. JDP 0-20, UK Land Power provides keystone land domain doctrine 
within the joint doctrine architecture, sitting below the capstone JDP 0-01, 
UK Defence Doctrine and alongside other joint operational domain doctrine, 
JDP 0-10, UK Maritime Power, JDP 0-30, UK Air Power, JDP 0-40, UK Space 
Power and JDP 0-50, UK Defence Cyber and Electromagnetic Doctrine. JDP 
0-20 is coherent with North Atlantic Treaty Organization capstone doctrine 
– Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine and AJP-3.2, Allied 
Joint Doctrine for Land Operations. While reflecting the joint context, JDP 0-20 
remains consistent with the British Army’s single-Service capstone doctrine, 
Army Doctrine Publication, Land Operations Part One: Competition and 
Conflict and Part Two: The Application of Land Power.

vii
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Chapter 1 – An introduction to UK land power. . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – Land power in context  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Chapter 3 – The foundations of land power  . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Chapter 4 – Employing UK land power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

[Page 10: No extractable text]

1
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Chapter 1
Section 1 – Land power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – Land forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Section 3 – The enduring utility of land power . . . . . 5
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Chapter 1 defines and explains land power, describing how 
UK land power is adapted to provide wide-ranging strategic 
utility.

2
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
1
An introduction to UK land power
”
“We need to ensure our warfighting 
capabilities are robust and credible 
to be able to deter threats from 
manifesting in the first place, but also 
to fight and win if they do.
 
Defence’s response to a more 
contested and volatile world, 
July 2023

3
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
1
An introduction to UK land power
Chapter 1
An introduction to 
UK land power
Section 1 – Land power
1.1. The land is where people live and compete, where most wars are fought 
and decided, and where peace is usually concluded. The land is therefore an 
important domain of war. Military activity is often controlled, and supported, 
from the land and, ultimately, the results of most military actions have effect on 
land. Fundamentally then, military activity helps create final decision in the land 
domain.       
1.2. Land power is defined as: the ability of land forces to exert decisive 
control and influence on actors and the course of events.1 At the heart of UK 
land power is the capacity of UK land forces to fight and win in combat on 
land, as part of an integrated force. Land forces can take physical possession 
of terrain, or physically defend and secure it, often delivering the enduring 
physical presence which can influence political outcomes. Land forces also 
deter aggression by altering an adversary’s cost-benefit analysis and can 
bolster an ally’s will and capacity to resist coercion.
1.3. The UK’s national strategy coordinates the instruments of national 
power.2 UK land power, along with maritime power, air power, space power 
and cyber power (including wide-ranging activity across the electromagnetic 
spectrum) form the interdependent levers of the military instrument of national 
power. The absence of any one of these levers can create vulnerabilities that 
adversaries could exploit. The military instrument’s unique contribution is to 
threaten, or apply, legitimate force in pursuit of national policy objectives.
1.4. Land power is generated and applied by our land forces.3 Within 
this context, land power offers scalable and responsive options to the UK 
1 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
2 The instruments of national power are: diplomatic, information, military and economic. 
See JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine  for further detail.
3 The term land forces refers to all those elements of UK Armed Forces that operate 
primarily within the land environment. This largely encompasses the British Army, but also 
embraces elements of the other Services, for example, the Royal Marines and the Royal Air 
Force (RAF) Regiment.

4
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
1
An introduction to UK land power
government for affecting the international security environment. Our land forces 
undertake a variety of operational themes, within which sit a broad range of 
activities, primarily combat operations, but also stability operations and, when 
appropriate, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief and the provision of 
military aid to the civil authorities. To fulfil these tasks, our land forces are held 
at the appropriate readiness so that they can be properly prepared and applied 
at the right time and place, overseas and at home. 
1.5. Land power, however, is not employed in isolation. Instead, a combination 
of components – maritime, land, air, space, cyber or special forces – are 
cohered within a single force to converge capabilities to create an integrated 
effect. Strong alliances and partnerships worldwide are also important because 
the size and complexity of the threats cannot be dealt with in isolation, rather 
they require multinational and multi-agency responses. Furthermore, effective 
crisis management requires active cross-government and multi-agency 
cooperation to develop and sustain a comprehensive response.
Section 2 – Land forces
1.6. The distinguishing characteristic of the land domain is the presence of 
humans in large numbers. Land forces can engage directly with friendly, neutral 
and adversarial actors, potentially seizing and holding terrain for extended 
periods and creating the conditions in which a favourable political outcome can 
be reached.
1.7. Taken together, soldiers,4 presence, persistence and adaptability form 
the attributes of land forces. These attributes are explored further in Chapter 3. 
In a domain shaped by human dynamics, soldiers remain at the heart of our 
land forces. Land forces depend on the abilities of professional, innovative 
4 The term soldier refers specifically to personnel serving in an army. It is acknowledged 
that those elements of our UK Armed Forces that operate primarily within the land 
environment, but belong to the other Services, use different terminology to describe their 
Service personnel. For example, the marines and gunners of the Royal Marines and RAF 
Regiment respectively.
Epidemics, financial crashes – all can be very frightening and 
disruptive. But war is still the most terrifying and destructive 
experience known to man … Deterring wars and being in a position 
to win wars that are forced upon one, are two sides of the same coin. 
 
          Baroness Thatcher, Statecraft
“

5
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
1
An introduction to UK land power
Perceived potency deters adversaries and reassures allies and partners
and adaptable individuals, moulded by training, education and discipline into 
cohesive teams, to react quickly to changing conditions. Land forces not 
only seize, occupy and defend areas of land, they also have the persistence 
and durability to remain in a region until long-term strategic objectives have 
been achieved. Land forces are a highly adaptable element of the wider force, 
fulfilling multiple functions in contact with human actors across the breadth of 
strategic requirements. 
Section 3 – The enduring utility of land 
power
1.8. Land forces are ideally placed to influence human activity by their 
physical presence. Across the broad range of activities they undertake, land 
forces can coerce, deter or reassure, depending on the mission context. 
Adaptable land forces can also transition rapidly between tasks, offering a 
nuanced, tailored response to evolving strategy and circumstances.
1.9. Underpinning all that our land forces do is the ability to fight and win 
in combat against our adversaries. Thinking, adaptive adversaries cannot 
be wholly defeated at range, final decision is usually achieved through close 
battle. Soldiers possessing the unique capability to find, fix, close with and 
defeat our adversaries are therefore required to achieve sustainable strategic 
outcomes. Perceptions of our combat power are also important because 
perceived potency deters adversaries and reassures allies and partners. 

6
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
1
An introduction to UK land power
1.10. Credible and capable land forces (usually framed within a wider 
multinational and multi-agency response) can deter potential adversaries from 
aggression. The reality, and perception, of our fighting power is therefore 
key, as is the placement of the force. Our land forces’ central contribution 
to deterrence is the ability of a credible force, designed to exploit adversary 
vulnerabilities, to be projected where its presence can have greatest deterrent 
effect. To increase the effect, land forces can be permanently positioned in the 
territory of an ally or partner to directly counter adversary interests and threat. 
The benefits of such persistent overseas engagement are to:
• demonstrate a tangible level of political commitment;
• contribute to conflict prevention by fostering mutual understanding 
through military-to-military contacts; and 
• help partners to build the capacity to operate more effectively.
1.11. Such activities strengthen alliances and partnerships and provide the 
security and stability which benefits UK prosperity. Persistent engagement 
overseas provides our forces with the insight and understanding that enables 
them to operate with agility and precision in a context of uncertainty. It 
also facilitates regional access and enables the contextual understanding 
necessary for the success of potential subsequent operations.
1.12. Our land forces, enabled by air and maritime strategic lift, can also 
support and assist domestic and international communities as they recover 
from natural and humanitarian disasters. This usually occurs as part of a 
wider military response that provides the speed, personnel, equipment and 
experience required to respond effectively to a given crisis.
1.13. The successful employment of UK land power is predicated on sound 
strategic thinking by Defence. A flexible and agile approach to strategy and 
warfare allows the development of a campaign plan based on achievable 
objectives, which can respond to unexpected events and crises. Such an 
approach, which focuses on restricting our opponent’s courses of action, 
whilst preserving our freedom of action through the exploitation of advantage, 
underpins the effective employment of land power. This approach is based on 
an intimate knowledge and understanding of the tasks at hand, including:
• what is required to achieve those tasks;
• any impediments and obstacles;

7
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
1
An introduction to UK land power
• the alternatives;
• the resources required; and
• the consequences of various courses of action.
1.14. Within the integrated approach, described in Chapter 4, a common 
national narrative is the foundation for employing UK land power, outlining why 
the UK is engaged and its strategic objectives.5  
5 Strategic narrative is described as the compelling storylines designed to resonate in the 
mind of its audiences that helps explain the campaign strategy and operation plan.  
JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine .

8
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
1
An introduction to UK land power
Key points
• Land power is defined as: the ability of land forces to exert decisive 
control and influence on actors and the course of events.
• UK land power, along with maritime, air, space, and cyber and 
electromagnetic power, form the interdependent levers of the military 
instrument of national power.
• Land power is generated and applied by our land forces to protect the UK 
and UK interests, fight our enemies, prevent future conflict and deal with 
disaster, both at home and overseas.
• Our land forces are held at the appropriate readiness so that they can be 
prepared appropriately and applied at the right time and place to fulfil the 
tasks required.
• Land power is underpinned by joint, cross-government, multinational and 
private sector partnerships. These relationships integrate capabilities and 
provide powerful synergies.
• Land forces are ideally placed to influence human activity in the 
environment where humans live and can coerce, deter or reassure. 
• The ability of land forces to seize and hold ground enables the physical 
control of territory and signifies the highest levels of political commitment.
• Underpinning all that our land forces do is the ability to fight and succeed 
in combat against our adversaries.
• Persistent engagement overseas provides our land forces with the insight 
and understanding that enable them to act with agility and precision.
• The successful employment of land power is predicated on sound 
strategic thinking.

9
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
1
An introduction to UK land power
Notes

[Page 20: No extractable text]

11
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Chapter 2
Chapter 2 provides an overview of the context in which UK 
land power is employed. It outlines the factors that shape 
the land environment, describing the enduring nature of 
war and the changing character of conflict, as well as the 
principal factors that shape contemporary operations.
Section 1 – Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Section 2 – The land environment . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Section 3 – The nature of war and the character 
                   of conflict . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

12
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
Only by understanding a  
competitor’s worldview, decision 
making, and behavioural proclivities 
can one outmanoeuvre that 
competitor; only by grasping a rival’s 
weaknesses and fears can one 
exploit them. Such understanding 
requires sustained intellectual 
investment.
 
Professor Hal Brands 
”
“

13
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
Chapter 2
Land power in context
Section 1 – Introduction
2.1. The effectiveness of land power varies according to how well we tailor 
its use to a particular context. The particular land environment in which our 
forces are to operate, the capacity of our force, and that of the adversary must 
be clearly understood. This understanding is a process; the environment and 
actors will alter as events change perceptions. But, the character of every 
conflict also varies – political objectives differ between conflicts; the capacity 
and capabilities of adversaries relative to our own will never be the same 
and those we seek to influence through our actions will change. Land power 
must be adapted to successfully meet the requirements of every context, 
balancing a readiness for those elements that remain constant with an ability 
to react rapidly to changing circumstances. An effective political strategy 
must underpin this approach, founded upon an adaptable land force able to 
integrate the full range of lethal and non-lethal capabilities from all operational 
domains. 
2.2. A clear understanding of the threat posed by the adversary, updated 
and maintained over time, and across the continuum of competition, creates 
opportunities for advantage.6 The point at which deployment begins is too 
late to begin preparing to fight. Instead, using a clear understanding of the 
adversary, a plethora of activities and opportunities can be used to shape the 
adversary to fulfil our will.7 At the same time, focusing on the adversary allows 
us to develop capabilities and mission sets designed specifically to disrupt 
and dislocate. A direct consequence of such an approach is the creation of a 
credible conventional deterrent, one which threatens the critical vulnerabilities 
of the adversary, and which the adversary fears.  
6 The continuum of competition spans cooperation, through rivalry and confrontation, 
to armed conflict. See Joint Doctrine Publication, 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, 
Chapter 1.
7 Including, but not limited to, active deterrence measures, information, operationally 
focused training and exercising, and strategic communications.

14
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
Denial is a more reliable strategy than punishment because, if 
the threats have to be implemented, it offers control rather than 
continuing coercion. With punishment, the adversary is left to decide 
how much more to take. With denial, the choice is removed.
 
Sir Lawrence Freedman
“
Operation Red Sheet – The Israeli capture of the Sinai 
Peninsula, June 1967
By 1967 , it was clear to the Israelis that their Arab neighbours, armed and 
prepared by the Soviet Union, were intent on a further attempt to destroy 
the state of Israel. Israel launched a pre-emptive attack against its Arab 
neighbours from 5 June 1967 . The first act of the war, Operation Focus, 
attempted to deprive the enemy of air support by destroying the Arab air 
forces on the ground. In the attack, the air forces of Egypt and Syria lost three 
quarters of their frontline strength, the Jordanian air force ceased to exist, and 
the Iraqi air force was severely damaged. The Israelis had established virtual 
air supremacy in little more than 24 hours. 
The Egyptian army had significantly reinforced its capabilities in the Sinai 
Peninsula since its defeat by the Israelis in 1956. General Abdul Mortagy, the 
Egyptian commander in Sinai, had established deep defensive belts across 
the peninsula which he hoped would wear down any Israeli attack and 
allow him to launch a counterstroke with his force of four infantry divisions 
supported by 800 tanks and tank destroyers. The Israelis were outnumbered 
and could not countenance an attritional battle, instead planning a precise 
and lightning-fast assault by two tank divisions, with a third in reserve and 
several independent tank brigades available to support. 
2.3. Developing the force through the optimisation of our own capabilities 
with specific reference to the capabilities of an adversary, or adversaries, is 
the most appropriate approach to take when facing a peer threat. A clear 
understanding of the enemy, leading to targeted developments in training, 
equipment and doctrine, helps to create a force that is focused on both 
attacking adversary vulnerabilities and negating adversary strengths, shaping 
the adversary for defeat prior to engagement in armed conflict. History 
and contemporary operations demonstrate that an intimate knowledge of 
the adversary provides significant opportunities for advantage, leading to 
operational freedom of action. 

15
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
Using speed and infiltrating around Egyptian defensive positions, 
General Tal’s division rapidly broke through the Egyptian defences 
south of Gaza and moved along the Mediterranean coast, smashing 
through defences in depth so quickly that the surprised Egyptians often did 
not have time to take control of their weapons before being overwhelmed. 
Further south, General Yoffe’s division, armed with the British-built Centurion 
tanks broke through an area which the Egyptians felt unpassable, advancing 
60 miles in ten hours, without meaningful opposition. The third Israeli tank 
division, commanded by General Sharon, destroyed the Egyptian defensive 
position at Abu Agheila and motored on at speed, overtaking the retreating 
Egyptians.
The Israeli invasion of the Sinai Peninsula 1967 
© Wikipedia

16
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
An Egyptian force, under Major General Ghoul, attempted a 
counterattack against Yoffe’s Centurions, but in advancing at speed 
at dusk, they ran into Yoffe’s force (of which they were unaware), 
which rapidly destroyed the Egyptian tank force (despite the Egyptian 
advantage of Soviet night sights). By morning, the Egyptians were in full flight 
pursued by Yoffe’s force and harassed by unopposed close air support from 
the Israeli Air Force. Over the next few days, the Israelis reached the Suez 
Canal capturing the passes out of Sinai and thousands of bemused Egyptian 
stragglers for whom the concentration of combat power, speed and surprise 
had been unanswerable.   
 Analysis 
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) had carefully analysed the capabilities, 
strengths and weaknesses of the Egyptian forces in the Sinai Peninsula in 
the years leading up to the outbreak of war. They had amassed an intimate 
understanding of Egyptian doctrine, Egyptian assumptions and the terrain 
over which the battle would be fought. The IDF trained its force to specifically 
dislocate the Egyptian force in being, integrating land, maritime and air power 
to deliver a coordinated hammer blow at speed, thereby creating shock. This 
action damaged Egyptian situational awareness and led to a series of errors 
by the Egyptian command; Israeli preparation, boldness in execution, and 
ruthless exploitation rapidly overwhelmed the Egyptians and ensured their 
defeat.
2.4. In the modern engagement space, orchestration – the coordination 
and synchronisation of military activity – must be integrated. The Army is the 
principal advocate for land power, but it is not alone; each of the Services 
are dependent to varying degrees on the land for support and sustainment, 
and vice versa. They can all create effects in the land domain in support of 
operational ends. Therefore, it is insufficient to bring together representatives 
from each of the operational domains only as operations demand – deployment 
is too late a stage to discover incoherency. Instead, from concept and 
capability development through to execution, representation, consultation and 
command must be cross domain and cross government. By adopting this 
approach, platforms and equipment, training and doctrine, and operational 
outputs can be fully interoperable and complementary by design. Integration 
demands that Defence thinks not in joint terms, but in terms of permanent 
integration.

17
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
2.5. To be effective, all human endeavour must be coordinated and 
managed; warfare and wider operations are no exception. A multitude of 
activities and actions occur simultaneously, which the commander must 
attempt to understand and manage faster and with greater accuracy and 
impact than the opposing commander to create decision advantage and 
maintain focus on the strategic aim. Defence, cognisant of the impossibility 
of the exercise of individual command by the commander in the modern 
engagement space, adopted mission command to devolve decisions to the 
person on the spot, working within the commander’s overall intent. Mission 
command enables rapid decision-making and exploitation, especially when 
levelled against more rigid command and control systems.
Section 2 – The land environment
2.6. The land environment is inherently complex and is shaped primarily 
by physical, human and information aspects. Unlike the air or maritime 
environments, it is distinguished by the fact that it is where people live. It is in 
the land environment that the roots of conflict are usually found, since conflict 
on land involves those things that people tend to value most: their lives, values, 
property, resources and systems of governance. The emphasis on these 
aspects changes with the character of the deployment; for example, in combat 
the physical aspects are to the fore, whereas in humanitarian operations, 
human and information aspects will be prioritised.  
Physical aspects
2.7. The land environment is varied and complex. It includes open grassland, 
cultivated land, forests, mountains, deserts, jungles, rivers, swamps, urban 
and littoral areas. Each creates constraints and freedoms, placing different 
demands on the people and equipment that operate within them. Terrain 
can block or enable communication, provide cover from detection or attack, 
and obstruct or enable movement. Variations in elevation and vegetation limit 
visibility and the effects of weapons, whilst movement on land is impeded 
and channelled by obstacles that land forces must overcome. Climate 
accentuates the demands of terrain, and may affect visibility, movement 
and communication. Extremes of heat and cold can create hostile physical 
and psychological conditions for land forces. Night operations can provide 
cover and the element of surprise but challenge the ability to retain effective 
command and control. 

18
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
2.8. The land itself can be altered by human activity. Obstacles can be 
cleared and roads built to enable access. Ground can be fortified or provided 
with physical defences, whilst certain types of pollution can amplify survival 
challenges. Globally, urbanisation has created physically, culturally and 
institutionally complex cities that are challenging for military forces operating 
in them, not least due to the force ratios traditionally required for success 
in urban operations on this scale. Where cities are located on the littoral – a 
complex operating environment in its own right – these complexities are 
amplified and even more dynamic. Land forces must be highly adaptable and 
resilient to operate successfully in these different conditions.
Human aspects
2.9. Land has immense practical and symbolic significance for human 
beings. Within the land environment, people inhabit towns, cities and 
villages, whilst even apparently unpopulated space often contains resources 
that support humans in some way. Control over land is consequently of 
fundamental political, cultural and psychological importance, and has often 
been regarded as decisive in conflict. Control of territory alone, however, 
is rarely sufficient – our actions must be supported by people if they are to 
contribute to successfully achieving desired outcomes.
Audiences perception and interpretation of events, and subsequent behaviour  
and decisions, determine how conflict is conducted and resolved
© Jose HERNANDEZ Camera 51 / Shutterstock.com

19
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
2.10. People exist in linguistic, cultural, social and political groups with 
specific identities, usually associated with particular territories. Individually or 
collectively, they form the audiences whose perception and interpretation of 
events, and subsequent behaviour and decisions, determine how conflict is 
conducted and resolved. These audiences may include those deployed, as 
well as broader international audiences, including those in the conflict region. 
They may be hostile, friendly or neutral to the actions of land forces, although 
the boundaries between these groups are not fixed.
Information aspects
2.11. The land environment is shaped by the way that these populations 
interact; it is the exchange of information between individuals, tribes, 
ethnic and interest groups, and countries that lie at the heart of human 
dynamics. This communication can be verbal, written or visual and it can 
be conducted directly between people or through radio, television or online. 
Human interaction is expanding and accelerating as information flows in the 
virtual dimension increase, linking individuals, groups and societies globally, 
unconfined by traditional state boundaries. The proximity of land forces to 
local populations allows them to distinguish between different people and 
groups, adjusting their interaction accordingly. Land forces therefore require 
a broad set of ‘people skills’, including empathy, emotional intelligence, an 
understanding of culture and history, and an ability to communicate in the local 
language.
2.12. It is through this exchange of information that individuals come to 
understand their environment, to articulate purposes and to frame processes 
of conflict and cooperation. As a means of influence, land forces must 
therefore understand what information is relevant, to whom, how it is received 
and how it might influence people’s decision-making and behaviours. We must 
also understand how land forces and other actors compete for influence by 
using information, in both the physical and virtual dimensions. 
2.13. Land forces must maximise the opportunities and advantages 
presented by the physical, human and information aspects of the land 
environment and eliminate, reduce or mitigate the challenges that they pose. 
Understanding this context at all levels, whether strategic, operational or 
tactical, and adapting the use of land forces accordingly therefore underpins 
the successful employment of land power.

20
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
Human security
2.14. Human security is the requirement to consider the safety and well-being 
of people caught up in armed conflict. It is an important cross-cutting theme 
of British military activity on land involving physical, human and information 
aspects. 
2.15. Human security is closely associated with legitimacy, the visibility 
of legitimacy, and the use of force. It is essential to create and maintain a 
compelling narrative, thereby maintaining the UK, its allies and partners’ 
campaign authority. In contrast, the absence of human security is a potential 
vulnerability of many authoritarian states and non-state actors. 
2.16. Human security describes several factors that, if ignored or 
compromised, are drivers of instability. These considerations include the:
• protection of civilians;
• role of women in peace and security and conflict resolution;
• effect of armed conflict on children and youth;
• impact of conflict on modern slavery and human trafficking;
• criticality of good governance – building integrity and countering 
corruption in affected areas;
• imperative to protect cultural property; and
• importance of preventing and countering violent extremism.
2.17. Addressing human security considerations in a coherent manner 
contributes toward more sustainable security outcomes and supports mission 
success. It requires the military to better understand how these factors affect 
individuals, communities and other actors. This understanding allows the 
military to plan operations that minimise harm to civilians, reduce human 
rights violations and achieve conflict-sensitive outcomes. Defence must take 
responsibility for coordinating human security in its areas of operations when 
warfighting and operating in all five operational domains. Furthermore, it is UK 
and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) policy for Allied and UK joint 
doctrine to consider human security.

21
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
War is a true chameleon that adapts its characteristics to the given 
case.
 
Carl Von Clausewitz
“
Section 3 – The nature of war and the 
character of conflict
2.18. The nature of war does not change. Armed conflict is an inherently 
chaotic, visceral and violent contest, whose underlying nature is human, 
adversarial and political.
2.19. The character of conflict, however, shaped by the age and space 
in which it is fought, continues to evolve. Human developments (such as 
technology, laws, social attitudes, philosophy, religion and international 
relationships) will affect the way that conflicts are prosecuted. In the 
contemporary context, conflict is characterised by constant competition, with 
traditional interpretations of peace and war being questioned.  
2.20. The distinctions that we can make between the nature of war and the 
character of conflict inform our approach to force development and design, 
doctrine, education and training. Deductions regarding the nature of war inform 
enduring principles and ideas, whilst deductions related to the character of 
conflict allow us to prepare appropriately for the more detailed requirements of 
contemporary operations. It is essential to draw on both in the right balance.
The nature of war
2.21. War has certain intrinsic attributes that transcend individual clashes 
and disputes. The nature of war will continue to be influenced by, and 
representative of, the entire spectrum of human behaviour, emotion and 
capability. Human emotions, such as fear and anger, can shape why we fight 
and what we fight for. Combat against an armed adversary is an intense, lethal 
human activity. Armed conflict is marked by violence, danger, stress, fear, 
exhaustion, isolation and privation that can adversely affect the will of all those 
involved. The battlefield often teems with non-combatants and is crowded with 
infrastructure. No matter how great the quantity of information available, a ‘fog 
of war’ caused by limitations in our ability to understand the dynamics of a 
situation will lead to uncertainty and chaos.

22
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
2.22. Human attributes also determine how we fight. Our physiology, 
challenged by the arduous nature of the land environment, defines what we 
can do physically. Land forces must be able to endure in the most hostile 
conditions, requiring high levels of resilience in individuals, as well as command 
and support structures and equipment. Our soldiers respond to effective 
leadership. Amongst other qualities, commanders must be flexible, decisive, 
resilient in the face of adversity, judicious and able to inspire others.
2.23. War remains adversarial. It is a reciprocal contest of wills against 
opponents that think, react and adapt. As the late strategist Colin Gray noted, 
the adversarial nature of war means ‘that every cunning plan has to succeed 
against, not blind nature, but rather an adversary with whom you conduct a 
permanent tactical, operational, strategic and political-moral dialogue.’8 UK 
land forces embrace a doctrinal tenet known as the manoeuvrist approach. 
It is an indirect approach which advocates applying strength against enemy 
vulnerabilities. It blends lethal and non-lethal actions to achieve objectives 
which shape the enemy’s understanding, undermines their will and breaks 
their cohesion. The manoeuvrist approach is explored further in Chapter 3.
2.24. War is a means to an end, not an end in itself. These ends may be 
clearly defined, or they may be ambiguous, and their legitimacy and utility may 
be challenged within our democratic society. But the fact remains that, as 
Clausewitz notes, war ‘is controlled by a political objective’, and this objective 
‘will set its course, prescribe the scale of means and effort which is required, 
and makes its influence felt throughout down to the smallest operational 
8 Colin Gray, Modern Strategy, 1999, page 42.
Land forces must be able to endure in the most hostile conditions,  
requiring high levels of resilience in individuals

23
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
detail.’9 Political contexts tend to alter over time: events may create new 
realities; new domestic political dynamics can emerge; and balances of power 
can change. In consequence, the purpose of a conflict, its value, the costs 
and benefits, and the military and political constraints and imperatives may 
all change in quite fundamental ways as a conflict develops. These changes 
necessarily shape the way operations must be conducted by land forces.
The character of conflict
2.25. Unlike the nature of war, the character of conflict is subject to change. 
Whilst predicting the precise character of future conflict is impossible, the 
character of a particular conflict will be shaped by factors such as its geography, 
participants and the type of tactics and technology that adversaries employ. 
2.26. The pervasive nature of information has changed the character of 
contemporary conflict. The increased availability and flow of information 
enables messages and ideas to be rapidly communicated across physical 
boundaries. In this interconnected operating environment, military activity is 
often immediately visible to local, regional and global audiences. The local and 
regional audience includes enemies, adversaries and a range of actors, from 
allies and partners to the local population. The global audience is unbounded, 
blurring previous operational and non-operational distinctions; even relatively 
minor armed conflicts have potentially global consequences. Each of these 
groups interprets our activity through their own lens, and each is influenced 
by others. Critically, it is the perceptions of these audiences that determine the 
success of military action.
2.27 . Comparatively open access to the virtual dimension allows our 
adversaries to:
• communicate ideas;
• develop and exploit recruitment opportunities;
• influence audiences;
9 Carl von Clausewitz, On War, 1976, pages 100 and 700.
It is impossible to precisely anticipate the character of future conflict. 
The key is to not be so far off the mark that it becomes impossible to 
adjust once that character is revealed.
 
Professor Sir Michael Howard
“

24
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
• mobilise resources; and
• identify targets.
Many actors are adept at presenting military activity to the audience, 
magnifying, mitigating or altering it to influence observers’ understanding of 
what actually happened. Information and propaganda campaigns using ‘facts’ 
– even if they are wrong or invented – to appeal to emotions more than logic 
are hard to rebut. Indeed, now more than ever, no conflict has a purely military 
solution. Instead, a compelling strategic narrative, reinforced at the operational 
and tactical levels, and with enduring coherence between actions and words, 
has the potential to be decisive in developing favourable consensus.
2.28. The increased visibility of our actions and the way we conduct 
operations has led to greater political, public and international scrutiny and 
accountability. Recent operational experience has demonstrated that this 
dynamic can potentially lead to policy constraints on the use of force, over and 
above the requirements of domestic law, the law of armed conflict and general 
international law. This, in turn, creates potential advantages, or perceptions of 
advantage, for our adversaries who may not choose to be bound in the same 
way.
2.29. Potential adversaries, both state and non-state, are increasingly 
demonstrating the will and capability to undermine Western operational 
capability, resolve and legitimacy by blending conventional and irregular 
forms of conflict, using both attributable and non-attributable methods. Our 
opponents’ methods, which can be applied in ways that remain below  
well-established military response thresholds, include posturing, provocation 
and persuasion in the physical and virtual dimensions, subversion, economic 
and cyberattack, with or without employing conventional military forces. This 
‘hybrid’ threat to the rules-based international order can make assessments 
as to whether any particular intervention crosses the threshold to become an 
armed conflict difficult.
Putin’s playbook combined disinformation with deniability, added 
disruptive technologies and the use of cyberspace to exploit 
weaknesses and enable conventional and irregular military 
forces. Putin employs sophisticated strategies designed to achieve 
objectives below the threshold that might elicit a concerted response 
from either the targeted state or others, such as the NATO alliance.
 
H.R. McMaster“

25
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
2.30.  Battlefields are no longer fixed. Threats that manifest overseas are 
also often blurred with those at home as our adversaries seek to exploit our 
vulnerabilities. High impact terrorist attacks are designed to seize the initiative 
and shape the political agenda, whilst both state and non-state adversaries 
seek to influence the perceptions of our domestic population. This complexity 
places even greater requirements on leadership at junior levels by demanding 
that they operate with autonomy and lead dispersed, agile units that can 
rapidly concentrate.
2.31. The proliferation of commercially available technology also increases  
the potential capability and effectiveness of our adversaries, both state and 
non-state. Secure communications, space-derived products and services, 
cyber capabilities and surveillance systems, including uncrewed aircraft 
systems, are affordable and can be easily acquired or improvised. Chemical 
weapons have been used, whilst biological, nuclear and radiological weapons 
remain a threat. Cyber and electromagnetic activities present significant 
opportunities and threats. From the use of digital communication systems 
through to global positioning systems, precision timing and weapon guidance 
systems, cyberspace and the electromagnetic environment routinely provide 
the medium through which operations are planned by land forces and make an 
increasingly important contribution to their execution. Hostile actors constantly 
probe our systems to seek vulnerabilities, intelligence and advantage, and 
yet these actions are often difficult to attribute to any state or group, creating 
unique challenges when formulating an appropriate response. 
Cyber and electromagnetic activities present significant opportunities and threats

26
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
2
Land power in context
 Key points
• The successful employment of land power requires force elements that 
are able to adapt to meet the requirements of a specific context.
• Central to successful employment is an iterative understanding of the 
adversary which identifies their strengths and weaknesses. To tackle the 
adversary in armed conflict, early and integrated preparation is essential.   
• The land environment is shaped primarily by human, information and 
physical aspects. It is varied and complex, creating constraints and 
freedoms for the people and equipment that operate within it.
• War has certain intrinsic attributes that transcend individual clashes and 
disputes. In particular, the nature of war remains human, adversarial and 
political.
• The distinctions that we can make between the nature of war and the 
character of conflict inform our approach to force development and 
design, doctrine, education and training.
• The pervasive nature of information has changed the character of 
contemporary conflict.
• In an interconnected operating environment, military activity is often 
immediately visible to local, regional and global audiences.
• Many actors are adept at presenting military activity to the audience and 
magnifying, mitigating or altering it to influence observers’ understanding 
of what actually happened.
• Our opponents’ methods, which can be applied in ways that remain 
below formal Western military response thresholds, complicate our 
assessment as to whether any particular intervention crosses the 
threshold to become an armed conflict.
• Battlefields are no longer fixed. Threats that manifest overseas are also 
often blurred with those at home as our adversaries seek to exploit our 
vulnerabilities.

27
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
2
Land power in context
Notes 

[Page 38: No extractable text]

29
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Chapter 3
Chapter 3 outlines the enduring attributes and required 
qualities and philosophy of land forces. It also explains the 
concept of fighting power and the tenets of land doctrine.
Section 1 – The attributes of land forces. . . . . . . . 31
Section 2 – Fighting power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Section 3 – The tenets of land doctrine  . . . . . . . . 37
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Annex 3A – Organisation of land forces  . . . . . . . . 42

30
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3
The foundations of land power
You may fly over a land forever; you 
may bomb it, atomize it, and wipe 
it clean of life – but if you desire to 
defend it, protect it, and keep it for 
civilisation, you must do this on the 
ground, the way the Roman Legions 
did – by putting yoursoldiers 
in the mud. 
 
 
T.R. Fehrenbach, 
This Kind of War: A Study in Unpreparedness ”
“

31
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3
The foundations of land power
Chapter 3
The foundations of land 
power
3.1. Every land force has inherent attributes which underpin their relative 
strengths and limitations. As introduced in Chapter 1, the four attributes of 
land forces are: soldiers, presence, persistence and adaptability. The overall 
operational effectiveness of a force is captured by the concept of fighting 
power. Fighting power consists of three components: conceptual, moral  
and physical.
Section 1 – The attributes of land forces
3.2. The enduring attributes of land forces are shaped by the distinct 
characteristics of the land environment, as well as the enduring nature of 
war. These attributes create advantages and opportunities which enable the 
broad utility of land power, although the employment of land forces must also 
acknowledge the potential challenges they may generate.
Soldiers
3.3. The primary attribute of any land force is its soldiers. Land conflict is 
a fundamentally human activity and, as such, it cannot be reduced solely to 
scientific templates and principles, rather it relies on human initiative, enterprise 
and intelligence. Land forces are therefore complicated organisations, requiring 
moral and structural cohesion. This can make land forces difficult to direct, so 
decentralised command systems tend to work best. Drills and standardised 
practices can also help achieve common understanding and unity of effort. In 
a land force, troops will always be the fundamental constituent of capability, 
whether it be by applying extreme physical violence or moving among, 
interacting with, and reassuring a population under stress. Our leaders and 
soldiers are moulded by training, education and discipline into cohesive teams 
with high morale and the will to win. A reliance on its people, however, also 
means that the effectiveness of a land force is dependent on its ability to 
recruit and effectively train the necessary number of personnel.
3.4. UK land forces also embrace the whole force approach advocated 
across Defence, which ensures unity of effort across outputs delivered by the 

32
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3
The foundations of land power
right mix of capable and motivated people – Regular and Reserve Service 
personnel, civil servants, contractors and industry partners. This means that 
the land force will consist of diverse thinkers, all of whom must integrate to 
deliver required outcomes.
Presence
3.5. Land forces’ presence on the ground means that they operate near 
people and in complex terrain. First-hand interaction with different peoples, 
places and cultures, as well as exposure to developing problems and threats, 
provides land forces with the potential to develop a detailed understanding of 
the physical, human and information aspects of the environment. They can 
get close enough to distinguish between different people and groups and 
communicate directly with them, adjusting their approach accordingly.
3.6. Land forces present a particular kind of threat to adversaries, whilst their 
presence also has the capacity to reassure neutral and friendly individuals and 
groups. Land forces can manoeuvre over ground, or via air or water, to take 
physical possession of terrain, or they can physically defend or secure it. The 
forward presence of credible and capable land forces also forms an important 
aspect of our ability to both deter adversary aggression, and to reassure our 
allies and partners. In addition, it may be necessary for an intervening force 
to stand between two or more hostile forces to stabilise the situation before 
peace can become a possibility. The presence of land forces is therefore often 
decisive.
Persistence
3.7. The attribute of persistence – the capacity of land forces to extend their 
presence and endure in an area for long periods of time – gives land forces 
the potential to broaden and deepen their understanding of the local context. 
The sustained presence of land forces before, during and after a conflict also 
allows them to engage with, influence and assist local populations and civil 
authorities, varying their actions according to the situation to make permanent 
the otherwise temporary gains achieved through combat. Together, the 
presence and persistence of land forces may be necessary to achieve and 
sustain a political outcome. Furthermore, persistent overseas engagement by 
land forces not only builds up vital multinational partnerships, but also ensures 
access to regional bases should land forces have to deploy to a particular 
region. Forces deployed for extended periods also require sustainment and 
protection commensurate with the threats and distance from the home base.

33
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3
The foundations of land power
 Adaptability
3.8. Adaptability underpins the ability of a land force to perform many 
functions; it lies at the heart of land power’s broad strategic utility. Land forces 
have inherent adaptability because they consist largely of organised groups 
with the ability to conduct a wide range of military and non-military tasks. So, 
even when optimised for warfighting, land forces retain broader utility. Land 
forces can perform a wide range of engagement, security and support tasks. 
Such versatility requires balanced capabilities, organised appropriately for 
specific tasks. However, no land force is infinitely adaptable. Factors such as 
the size of a land force and its objectives, equipment, structure and training will 
place practical limits on its ability to meet contingencies.
3.9. Adaptability demands that land forces embrace the need to learn quickly 
and to change plans accordingly. The character of future conflict cannot 
be predicted accurately, so land forces must prepare for the most complex 
and demanding operations but also maintain the agility to adapt rapidly to 
specific operational requirements. Adaptable land forces can recognise and 
understand new challenges, experiment with solutions and implement effective 
responses at a higher tempo than the enemy. This allows them to seize and 
maintain the initiative and exploit opportunities. Our land forces’ command 
philosophy, mission command, embraces decentralised execution, providing 
the freedom of action to adapt to circumstances on the ground whilst still 
achieving the commander’s intent. Adaptability is further enabled by several 
factors, including education, creativity and common doctrine.
Dependencies and limitations
3.10. Land power is critically  
dependent on the other operational 
domains for support. This dependency 
limits the speed and scale of deployment 
and the degree to which land forces are 
strategically mobile. This can be offset 
somewhat by persistent presence and 
adaptability, but this approach is costly. 
Policy-makers and strategists must take 
these dependencies and limitations into 
account when making decisions about 
the employment and deployment of land 
forces.    
Land power is critically dependent on  
the other operational domains

34
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3
The foundations of land power
Section 2 – Fighting power
3.11. Fighting power is a concept that describes the operational effectiveness 
of armed forces, or any element of them.10 Fighting power recognises the fact 
that forces do not simply consist of such tangibles as people and equipment, 
they also have intangible conceptual and moral properties that can play a 
decisive role in shaping their effective employment. The drive to achieve the 
right balance of fighting power guides force development and preparation, 
with each component adjusted as necessary to meet the needs of a specific 
context. Fighting power is therefore intrinsically linked to the required quality of 
adaptability. It consists of three components as described below and shown in 
Figure 3.1.11 
Figure 3.1 – The components of fighting power
10 Fighting power is a common concept across Defence and the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO). See Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine , AJP-3.2, 
Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations  and Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK 
Defence Doctrine.
11 A detailed breakdown of each component can be found in Chapter 2 of JDP 0-01, UK 
Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition.
• Personnel
• Equipment
• Training and
   collective performance
• Sustainability
• Readiness     
Physical 
•  Leadership
•  Followership
•  Culture
•  Warﬁghting ethos
•  Moral cohesion
•  Motivation
•  Moral integrity
Moral
‘the will’
‘the means’  
•  Strategic analysis
    and assessment 
•  Concept
  development
•  Doctrine
Conceptual 
‘the thought process’
Generated by force development

35
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3
The foundations of land power
a. The conceptual component. The conceptual component of 
fighting power rests on the development and application of doctrine, a 
set of fundamental principles by which land forces guide their actions 
in support of objectives. Agile, not dogmatic, doctrine takes past 
experience and extracts guidance for dealing with future challenges, 
providing a foundation from which initiative can be applied with 
confidence. An understanding of relevant doctrine, as well as the 
dynamics of any given situation, provides the context, insight and 
foresight required for effective decision-making. The flexibility to adapt 
to deal with dynamic challenges is another essential element of the 
conceptual component. Realistic and demanding training to develop 
core skills, along with organisational and technological flexibility, based 
on doctrine and supported by effective lessons processes, underpin the 
ability to adapt successfully.
b. The moral component. The moral component concerns the human 
aspect of fighting power. It supplies and sustains our land forces’ will to 
fight. It has three mutually dependent elements.
(1) High morale enables the land force to fight and overcome the 
privations of conflict. This is largely dependent on confidence in 
equipment, training, sustainment and leadership. Moral cohesion 
contributes to this success, providing a sense of shared identity 
and purpose that binds individuals into teams, and teams into 
effective fighting forces. Moral cohesion is sustained by shared 
values and standards, which guide the actions of every soldier.
(2) Land forces rely on the strength of their leaders at all levels to 
establish and sustain motivation, morale, moral cohesion and trust. 
Their vision, intellect, communication and unceasing motivation 
pave the path through chaos and confusion.
(3) To be effective, a force’s actions must reflect a sound and 
appropriate ethical, moral and legal foundation. These actions are 
guided by their obligations as members of the UK Armed Forces 
and an ethical foundation shared with that of UK society. The 
values of courage, discipline, respect for others, integrity, loyalty 
and selfless commitment together guide our actions. They demand 
that the actions of our land forces are lawful, appropriate and totally 
professional.12 
12 Values and Standards of the British Army and The Army Leadership Code – An 
Introductory Guid e provides a detailed and authoritative explanation.

36
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3
The foundations of land power
c. The physical component. The physical component of fighting 
power, sometimes referred to as combat power, provides the means 
to fight. Our ability to attract, recruit and retain the right people, with 
the right skills, in the right quantity and at the right time is critical to 
fighting power. Workforce and equipment are converted into ready, 
deployable and resilient forces through education and training. Training 
must be realistic, providing the forcing function for wider innovation and 
adaptation, as well as creating the conditions in which our land forces’ 
fighting spirit can be developed. Training must therefore replicate the 
challenge of combat so that it inculcates the confidence and tactical 
innovation necessary to prevail in war. Sustainability is also essential; 
even if the force is fully staffed and has all the necessary equipment, 
if it cannot be sustained, it cannot be employed as intended. The 
physical component is also reliant on wider resources; staffing, 
equipping, training and sustaining armed forces costs money. The 
physical component of land forces can be broken down into units and 
formations, or by the function that they fulfil. These constituent parts are 
detailed at Annex 3A.
3.12. Fighting power can only be applied if it is held at the appropriate 
readiness, can be deployed in time and then recovered for the next operation. 
Readiness applies to all components of fighting power. The deployment and 
recovery of land forces also requires organic and non-organic enablers. For 
example, maritime and air forces enable the deployment of a land force to 
High morale enables the land force to fight and overcome the privations of conflict

37
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3
The foundations of land power
a point of disembarkation from which it may need to project itself overland 
for long distances. Fighting power also varies depending on the level of 
interoperability that the force can achieve with other military formations and 
with other actors. These factors must be accounted for when considering the 
employment of land forces in a wider context based on their readiness state 
and overall military utility in each situation.
Section 3 – The tenets of land doctrine
3.13. Land doctrine has three tenets which together present a cohesive 
operational philosophy. The overarching idea is the orchestration of  
task-organised capabilities in combination to target and exploit an opponent’s 
vulnerabilities and achieve positions of advantage, which can be psychological, 
temporal or physical, and which can be exploited to create freedom of action. 
This idea includes ground, air, littoral and information manoeuvre conducted in 
synchronised and simultaneous combination. 
3.14. The manoeuvrist approach is a blend of disruptive manoeuvre and 
destructive firepower (attrition and manoeuvre). It is derived from historical and 
contemporary operational analysis of approaches to warfare and operations 
that have delivered tactical and operational success disproportionately 
greater than the resources applied. It is therefore an approach suited to a 
small, professional force. It is an indirect approach that aims to out-think 
and outmanoeuvre opponents and applies strength against identified 
vulnerabilities. It employs lethal and non-lethal capabilities in combination to: 
• seize and hold the initiative through firepower, pre-emption, surprise, 
simultaneity, tempo and exploitation; 
• shape understanding through deception and information activities; 
• undermine will by convincing the opponent that their defeat is 
inevitable; and   
• fracture the cohesion of the opponent’s combined arms system 
by defeating critical capabilities through targeting their critical 
vulnerabilities and thereby setting the conditions and create 
opportunities to bring our strengths to bear.  

38
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3
The foundations of land power
It is important to bear in mind that the opponent will do their utmost to 
undermine our will and fracture our cohesion; we therefore need to take active 
measures to protect our own critical capabilities, morale and cohesion.
3.15. The combined arms approach is the synchronised and simultaneous 
application of tactical forces and capabilities across operational domains 
to create an effect greater than if each element was used separately 
or sequentially. Through task organisation, it reinforces strengths and 
compensates for weaknesses through complementary grouping. It also 
imposes dilemmas on opponents by confronting them with multiple threats; 
forces are task-organised so that if the opponent attempts to protect against 
one threat, they become vulnerable to another.
3.16. Mission command is a philosophy of decentralised command that 
promotes the use of initiative and freedom of action to achieve the higher 
commander’s intent. It tells subordinates what to achieve and why, but not 
how. It is not, however, an absence of command and control, commanders 
must express a clear intent and main effort, provide adequate resource 
and give firm direction when necessary. Subordinates are expected to take 
determined action to achieve them. Trust and mutual understanding underpin 
mission command. 
Mission command promotes the use of initiative and freedom of action

39
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3
The foundations of land power
The Second Nagorno-Karabakh War 
September – November 2020
The collapse of the Soviet Union unleashed ethnic and cultural tensions  
in several of its constituent republics. Between 1988 and 1994, the former 
republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan fought over the Azeri region of  
Nagorno-Karabakh, the population of which was majority Armenian. By 1994, 
when a ceasefire was agreed, the Armenians, with the help of their Russian 
allies, had taken significant Azeri territory, indeed ethnic Armenians had 
established an autonomous republic, Artsakh, in the centre of  
Nagorno-Karabakh.  
Over the next 26 years an uneasy peace held. Using wealth earned from its 
petrochemical industry, Azerbaijan invested heavily in sophisticated uncrewed 
aircraft systems purchased from Israel and Turkey. Both countries operated 
effective multilayered air defence systems and modern combined arms 
formations. The Azeris recognised the need to gain control of the air domain 
as a critical element of successful land manoeuvre.   
In September 2020, the Azeris launched an operation using a complex 
deception plan designed to force the Armenians to unmask their  
ground-based air defence network. The Azeris created a chaotic picture, 
blinding the Armenians to their intentions and deceiving them into emitting 
radar that revealed their location. This allowed the targeting and destruction 
of the Armenian air defence system ceding initiative, momentum and freedom 
of manoeuvre to the Azeris.   


40
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3
The foundations of land power
Next, the Azeris launched a ground offensive, advancing rapidly 
into Nagorno-Karabakh from the north and south while sealing 
the province from reinforcement with long-range fires and 
loitering munitions, enabled by surveillance and target acquisition from 
reconnaissance drones. Although the Armenians inflicted severe losses 
on the Azeris, they could not reverse the momentum; steadily, the isolated 
Armenian strongpoints were reduced by fires delivered by artillery, loitering 
munitions and armed uncrewed aircraft systems. Simultaneously, the Azeris 
infiltrated light infantry and special forces between the strongpoints, attacking 
into depth to seize key terrain objectives.   
In the final phase of the operation, the Azeris sought to cut the Lachin  
corridor from Armenia into Nagorno-Karabakh and threaten the capital of the 
self-declared Republic of Artsakh, Stepanakert. Relentless pressure on the 
Lachin corridor in October 2020 strangled the Armenian supply network and 
led to the capture of the city of Shusha in November 2020, only 15 kilometres 
from Stepanakert. Unable to respond effectively and facing imminent defeat, 
the Armenians agreed to a ceasefire. The subsequent peace agreement 
restored much of the territory lost by Azerbaijan in 1994.      
Analysis  
Although the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War was heralded at the time as 
new and different, in essence the Azeris were repeating tactics used by 
other armies throughout the ages when faced with a seemingly impenetrable 
defence. These tactics were to: understand the terrain and the enemy’s 
strengths and weaknesses; gain control of the air domain; fracture the 
cohesion of the defence by destroying critical capabilities; exploit gaps and 
weaknesses at speed; destroy the key elements of the defence; bypass the 
enemy’s strongpoints; and ruthlessly exploit opportunities to achieve decisive 
success. 

41
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3
The foundations of land power
 
Key points
• Every land force has inherent attributes – soldiers, presence, persistence 
and versatility – which underpin their relative strengths and limitations.
• The primary attribute of any land force is its soldiers. Land forces rely on 
human initiative, enterprise and intelligence.
• Land forces’ presence on the ground means that they operate near people 
and terrain, enabling them to physically defend or secure objectives.
• The presence and persistence of land forces may be necessary to achieve 
and sustain a political outcome.
• Adaptability underpins the ability of a land force to perform many functions; 
it lies at the heart of land power’s broad strategic utility.
• Land forces must be adaptable to deal with new and changing situations, 
embracing the need to learn quickly and to change plans accordingly.
• Fighting power is a concept that describes the operational effectiveness of 
armed forces, or any element of them. It consists of three components – 
conceptual, moral and physical.
• Fighting power can only be applied if it is held at the appropriate readiness, 
can be deployed in time, and then recovered for the next operation.
• The way land forces operate is articulated through an overarching 
philosophy established by the three tenets of land doctrine in combination: 
the manoeuvrist approach, combined arms approach and mission 
command. 

42
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3A
The foundations of land power
Annex 3A
Organisation of land 
forces
3A.1. Land forces are generally structured hierarchically into formations, units 
and sub-units and categorised by function and type. They are organised on 
operations by combining arms to form a cohesive and versatile whole.
3A.2. Table 3A.1 shows the typical hierarchy that flows down from corps, 
division,13 brigade, unit14 and sub-unit.15 Formations and units are designed to 
be modular and scalable, so that elements can be easily added or taken away, 
and they can be expanded or contracted.
Corps
A corps commands a number of divisions, functional brigades 
and task forces, comprising all types of force elements. It can 
command through the operational function (as a joint task force 
headquarters for a land-centric operation or as a land component 
headquarters) or as a corps at the higher tactical level. In 
the British Army, the corps is the highest level of deployable 
headquarters and is assigned to the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) as the Allied Rapid Reaction Corps, usually 
employed in line with the demands of NATO’s Concept for the 
Deterrence and Defence in the Euro-Atlantic Area  but which can 
also deploy on national or multinational missions. It is resourced 
and structured to operate in a joint, inter-agency and multinational 
context and can execute large-scale, complex, tactical operations 
simultaneously.
Division
A division is a combined arms tactical formation that commands 
brigades within a corps, joint task force or theatre framework. 
It is the lowest level formation that routinely commands all 
types of force elements, capable of planning and executing 
simultaneously, but can also command through the operational 
function as a land component headquarters. As a result, the 
division is the lowest level of command capable of routinely 
interacting with joint, inter-agency and multinational actors.
13 A division is defined as: a major administrative and tactical unit/formation which 
combines in itself the necessary arms and services required for sustained combat, larger 
than a regiment/brigade and smaller than a corps.  NATOTerm.
14 Units of the British Army are called regiments or battalions. A Royal Marine unit is called 
a commando.
15 British Army sub-units are called squadrons, companies or batteries.

43
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3A
The foundations of land power
Brigade
A brigade is a combined arms tactical formation with intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance, combat support and combat 
service support force elements. Its primary focus is creating 
tactical effects.
Unit
A unit is the smallest grouping capable of independent operations 
with organic capability over long periods. It contains integral 
combat service support and limited combat support elements.
Sub-unit A unit contains a number of sub-units, usually three to five.  
Sub-units are usually grouped into battlegroups or task forces.
 
Table 3A.1 – Land force formations, units and sub-units
3A.3. Land forces are categorised functionally as combat, combat support 
or combat service support force elements, as described in table 3A.2. 16 In 
addition, the UK also has specialist forces trained for: capacity building tasks; 
air and amphibious manoeuvre; force protection tasks; and intelligence and 
reconnaissance tasks.
Combat
Combat force elements are those that engage the enemy 
directly. They manoeuvre and fight, typically employing direct fire 
weapons, to gain ground, find and defeat the enemy, or acquire 
information. They include armoured, reconnaissance, infantry, 
and attack and reconnaissance aviation units.
Combat 
support
Combat support force elements provide operational assistance, 
including fire and manoeuvre support to combat force elements. 
They include support helicopters, artillery, combat engineers, 
intelligence, communications, command support and information 
activity specialists.
Combat 
service 
support
Combat service support is the organisational support provided to 
the whole force, primarily administration and logistics. It includes 
logistic, health service and equipment support, personnel, welfare 
and administration force elements. Certain combat service 
support functions are also provided by combat engineers, such 
as providing water and electrical power supply or infrastructure.
 
Table 3A.2 – Functional categorisation of land forces 
3A.4. Complementary to functional categorisation, land forces are also 
distinguished by their force type, described by NATO as heavy, medium or light 
16 Traditionally the major combat and combat support functional branches of the British 
Army were known as arms (leading to the expression ‘combined arms’) and the combat 
service support branches were known as services.

44
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
3A
The foundations of land power
depending on the vehicles and equipment they use. These force types are 
brought together (task organised) for specific roles or tasks – with force design 
having to make trade-offs between protection, firepower, operational and 
tactical mobility, and logistic demand.
3A.5. The combination of capabilities provided by different force elements 
and types, when they have sufficiently high levels of interoperability, produces 
extremely powerful combined arms forces.17  A battlegroup is a combined arms 
force commanded by a combat unit headquarters made up of a combination 
of sub-units drawn from across the functional areas. A task force refers to 
a combined arms force created for a specific purpose. It is based on the 
headquarters of any type of force, at unit and formation level, and is not limited 
to a combat arm.18  
3A.6. Task organisation is the process by which combined arms forces 
are formed. Task organisation during operations increases flexibility. Task 
organisation may take place at any level within UK land forces and can, with 
some limitations, occur within a multinational context. It is enabled by clearly 
defined command relationships between formations, units and sub-units.
17 There are three levels of interoperability. Integrated means that forces are able to 
merge seamlessly and are interchangeable. Compatible means that forces can interact 
with each other in the same geographical engagement space in pursuit of a common goal. 
Deconflicted means that forces can coexist but not interact with each other. Derived from 
AJP-01, Allied Joint Doctrine .
18 An example would be an engineer unit allocated an infantry sub-unit for local 
protection.

45
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
3A
The foundations of land power
Notes

[Page 56: No extractable text]

47
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Chapter 4
Chapter 4 examines how UK land power is employed. It 
explores its functions in support of national strategy, its 
application in the contemporary operating environment, as 
well as its essential integration with joint, cross-government, 
multi-agency and multinational partners.
Section 1 – Applying UK land power. . . . . . . . . . 49
Section 2 – Working together  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57

48
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
4
Employing UK land power
In the modern engagement space, 
where critical enablers of land power 
such as air power, cyber, and space 
are outside the control of the Army, 
orchestration must be integrated.
 
 
Army Doctrine Note 22/02, 
Freedom of Action in the Application of Land Power ”
“

49
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
4
Employing UK land power
Chapter 4
Employing UK land power
4.1. Land power encompasses the employment of UK land forces – in 
conjunction with the other Services and multi-agency, multinational and private 
sector partners – to achieve a broad range of political objectives. In a domain 
defined by complexity and uncertainty, our land forces are capable of exerting 
land power for strategic effect across a range of tasks, whether deterring 
adversaries, defeating our enemies, building partnerships or improving stability. 
Section 1 – Applying UK land power
4.2.  The ability of our land forces to fulfil the functions of land power cannot 
be taken for granted. Instead, the way in which UK land power is applied 
must be adapted according to context. Land forces are employed across 
the continuum of competition to provide a range of options that support the 
achievement of foreign policy and security objectives. The way they operate is 
determined by the circumstances in which they are to act. Operational themes 
describe these types of deployments. There are six land operational themes:  
• conventional warfare;
• irregular warfare;
• stability and peace support operations;
• engagement;
• humanitarian assistance and disaster relief; and
• homeland resilience.
Conventional warfare
4.3. The potential for conflict to occur under geographically and politically 
limited conditions means that forces able to credibly conduct conventional 
warfare have continued relevance. Conventional warfare focuses on defeating 
enemy armed forces and securing terrain objectives and populations; tactical 
activity involves a sequence of battles and engagements in a campaign. Nation 
states, or coalitions and alliances of states, are generally the principal actors 
involved, but well-organised and resourced non-state actors are also capable 
of conventional warfare.  

50
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
4
Employing UK land power
4.4. Land forces are primarily organised, trained and equipped for 
conventional warfare because the ability to deter conventional warfare drives 
opponents to pursue their objectives through less costly forms of competition. 
It is also easier to adapt land forces prepared for conventional warfare to other 
forms of competition than it is to adapt a gendarmerie force to the unforgiving 
demands of conventional warfare, no matter how infrequent the requirement. 
Examples of conventional warfare include the Yom Kippur War (1973), the 
liberation of Kuwait (1991), the invasion of Iraq (2003), the second  
Nagorno-Karabakh war (2020) and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine (2022). 
4.5. Conventional warfare may transition to irregular warfare, as defeated 
enemies resort to pursuing their objectives in other ways. Land forces must 
therefore plan for the transition to other forms of competition and operational 
themes, such as irregular warfare and stability operations, during conventional 
warfare.19   
Irregular warfare
4.6. The practice of irregular warfare does not seek to defeat an opponent’s 
armed forces in battle but rather emphasises indirect and asymmetric 
approaches to undermine and exhaust an opponent’s legitimacy, influence 
and will. Historically, irregular warfare has often been adopted by weaker 
actors to negate the conventional warfare superiority of state armed forces 
that they cannot defeat militarily. Countering irregular warfare through 
counterinsurgency, counterterrorism and stability operations has therefore 
been a recurring commitment for land forces. The early 21st Century has 
been dominated by operations that have sought either to deny sanctuaries to 
specific irregular threats, principally violent extremist organisations, or to build 
state authority to deny irregular forces the space to operate.20   
4.7. It is important not to conflate irregular warfare with unconventional 
operations. Unconventional operations target adversary critical vulnerabilities, 
such as threat finance and corruption, while also applying leverage by novel 
means to undermine an adversary’s will and cohesion. Whilst bounded 
within legal and ethical norms, unconventional operations are supported by a 
conceptual approach that seeks to exploit the vulnerabilities of an adversary 
and could be part of any one of the operational themes. 
19 Army Field Manual (AFM), Conventional Warfare  describes the tactical activities 
employed in conventional warfare.
20 AFM, Irregular Warfare  describes irregular warfare in greater depth.

51
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
4
Employing UK land power
Stability and peace support operations
4.8. The commitment of land forces to stability and peace support 
operations is a way of supporting international peace and security, protecting 
civilians, and containing and preventing conflict. Stability and peace support 
operations are not usually peaceful; combat can be a defining feature, as it 
was in the former Yugoslavia during the 1990s, requiring the employment 
of forces normally associated with conventional warfare, such as tanks and 
artillery. 
4.9. The UK can work unilaterally to counter instability overseas to help 
strengthen, uphold or restore peace and security, but it usually does so as part 
of a wider response from the international community, often as part of a United 
Nations mission. Commitment of land forces can range from individuals to 
formed units and formations.  
4.10. Stability operations focus on providing security and control that 
establishes a safe and secure environment for other agencies and actors 
to set the conditions for longer-term stability by addressing the primary 
drivers of violence and conflict. Examples of stability and peace support 
operations include Operation Newcombe in support of the United Nations 
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilisation Mission in Mali and Operation Tosca 
in Cyprus.21    
21 AFM,  Stability and Peace Support Operations  provides further detail.
The UK contributes to stability and peace support operations, usually  
as part of a wider response from the international community

52
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
4
Employing UK land power
Engagement
4.11. Engagement operations use land forces to gain insight, develop 
understanding, exercise influence, shape perceptions, support allies and 
partners, and deter and compete with adversaries. Its conduct involves 
working alongside other government departments, and with international 
allies and partners, and contributes towards preventing instability and 
conflict. Engagement involves three types of activity:  
• contribution to wider Defence engagement;
• outreach (including military assistance operations and civil-military 
cooperation); and 
• information activities (including media operations and psychological 
operations).   
4.12. Engagement is a whole force activity. The land contribution can range 
from deployments of specialists, specifically trained and assigned for limited 
activities, through to generalists deployed as part of a broader multinational 
operation or undertaking business as usual activities in home base locations. 
Examples of engagement include military assistance to the armed forces of 
Ukraine through Operations Interflex and Orbital, to the African Union Mission 
in Somalia (AMISOM) force-contributing nations, and partnered collective 
training at land regional hubs in Oman and Kenya.22  
Humanitarian assistance and disaster relief
4.13. The commitment of land forces to humanitarian assistance is a 
way of relieving human suffering. It addresses the humanitarian needs of a 
population. This often equates to saving lives, reducing suffering and restoring 
basic services. Examples of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief 
include Operation Gritrock (2015) to provide medical support against the Ebola 
virus epidemic in West Africa and support to victims of Hurricane Irma in the 
Caribbean (2017).23 
22 AFM,  Engagement describes engagement  in greater depth.
23 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-52, Disaster Relief Operations Overseas: the Military 
Contribution and AFM, Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief  describe these matters 
in greater depth.

53
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
4
Employing UK land power
4.14. Non-combatant evacuation operations involve the relocation of 
designated non-combatants, threatened in a foreign country, to a place 
of safety. In the event of a crisis that requires the evacuation of eligible 
persons, it will be the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office that 
coordinates the evacuation and they may request support from the Ministry of 
Defence. Land forces can be committed to provide security to the evacuation 
operation. Examples include Operation Pitting in Kabul (2021), Operation 
Highbrow in Beirut (2006) and Operation Palliser in Sierra Leone (2000).24   
Homeland resilience
4.15. Land forces contribute to homeland resilience and support the civil 
authorities under military aid to the civil authorities. This is distinct from the 
British Army’s contribution to operations to defend UK territorial integrity.    
4.16. Resilience is the overarching term used to describe activities that 
ensure the UK government can continue to deliver essential functions in times 
of national crisis, including terrorist attack and industrial action, or in civil crises 
such as flooding.  
4.17. Support may be provided by land forces to other government 
departments and devolved administrations for urgent work of national 
importance, responding to emergencies or in maintaining essential supplies 
and services. Military regional command structures, planning capability and 
speed of response in emergency are highly valued by civil authorities.  
4.18. Support may also be provided to civil law enforcement agencies, 
such as the police or Border Force, for the maintenance of law, order 
and public safety using specialist capabilities or equipment beyond that 
of civil powers. Training and logistic assistance may also be provided to 
civil authorities through the provision of the Defence estate or facilities for 
either training or operational support to other agencies carrying out their 
duties. Examples of homeland resilience operations include Operation Rescript 
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic (2020–21), Operation Temperer in 
response to terrorist attacks (2017), Operations Shaku (winter 2015–16) and 
Pitchpole (winter 2013–14) in response to flooding and Operation Fresco in 
response to industrial action by firefighters (2003).25  
24 JDP 3-51, Non-combatant Evacuation Operations provides further detail.
25 JDP 02, UK Operations: the Defence Contribution to Resilience and AFM, Homeland 
Resilience describe this type of operation in greater depth.

54
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
4
Employing UK land power
Special operations  
4.19. Special operations can occur across the six land operational themes. 
Special operations are not operations conducted solely by special operations 
forces, although such forces are most frequently involved. Rather it is the 
operation itself that is ‘special’, conducted using capabilities and forces drawn 
from across the whole force.  
4.20. Special operations take place when risk is high and the profile needs 
to be discreet or covert. The highest risk and lowest profile special operations 
will be of strategic importance and executed through Strategic Command 
capabilities, although land forces could be employed in support.  
4.21. Special operations by their nature have high political, reputational 
and physical risks. Risk mitigation is therefore central to their planning and 
execution. To generate permissions and to demonstrate risk management, 
significant risk mitigation measures will be necessary and bespoke to each 
special operation. Special operations involve three broad tasks: 
• military assistance;
• special reconnaissance; and 
• direct action.
4.22. Land forces contribute to Defence special operations by providing 
special operations-capable forces, including a combination of specialists and 
vetted or compartmented generalists. Existing operations sometimes provide 
a platform for the discreet and covert planning and execution of special 
operations. 
Section 2 – Working together
The integrated approach and integrated action
4.23. UK national policy mandates an integrated approach to national power. 
The integrated approach, known as the comprehensive approach in the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), formalises the requirement for government 
departments to coordinate their responses to national policy challenges. In 
turn, integrated action articulates Defence’s contribution to the integrated 
approach. Joint Doctrine Publication 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine describes 
it as the audience-centric orchestration of military activities, across all 

55
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
4
Employing UK land power
operational domains, synchronised with non-military activities to influence the 
attitude and behaviour of selected audiences necessary to achieve successful 
outcomes. As with combined arms, it seeks to create effects that are greater 
than the sum of the parts employed.   
Multi-domain integration and convergence
4.24. Multi-domain integration is the means whereby the different areas of 
Defence work together seamlessly, and with government partners and allies, to 
deliver a desired outcome. In multi-domain operations on land, effects created 
in multiple operational domains are orchestrated through the operational 
function; this process, and the resultant outcome, is called convergence. 
Convergence is the concerted employment of effects created in multiple 
operational domains and directed at decisive points, such as an adversary’s 
systems, formations, commander or ground. 
The operational function
4.25. The operational function, which can be carried out by any appropriately 
resourced formation headquarters, translates strategy into tactical activities and 
ensures that tactical activities are coherent with strategy. In doing so, it ensures 
that the tactical formations are sufficiently resourced to accomplish their 
missions and that effects owned and created in other operational domains are 
converged with tactical activities in the land domain to have decisive effect. 
A Royal Air Force, CH-47 Chinook lands along with a Finnish NH90 helicopter  
to drop off soldiers during Exercise Vigilant Fox in Finland

56
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
4
Employing UK land power
Multinational and multi-agency activities
4.26. A national approach will usually be framed within a broader 
multinational and multi-agency response, involving many actors including allies, 
international organisations and non-governmental organisations.26 Alliances 
and coalitions provide a range of options that most nations could not generate 
independently, including unique capabilities or particular skills, as well as 
potentially providing the required mass for favourable force ratios. Participation 
in multinational operations can also enhance perceptions of legitimacy and 
increase influence across the international community. Maintaining cohesion 
across the international community is therefore a strategic priority in any 
multinational operation.
4.27 . The ability to successfully integrate militarily is highly dependent on 
interoperability between forces.27 Our land forces face distinct challenges 
to achieving interoperability, including differing objectives, cultures, 
structures, equipment, laws and languages, as well as variations in doctrine, 
tactics, techniques, procedures and sustainment. Achieving high levels of 
interoperability takes time and resources to develop and maintain and must 
be honed through training and by lessons identified during operations. Shared 
understanding improves interoperability, fusing information from a diverse 
range of organisations into a coherent whole.
26 Multi-agency planning and crisis management is covered in detail in JDP 01, UK Joint 
Operations Doctrine .
27 Interoperability is defined as: the ability to act together coherently, effectively and 
efficiently to achieve tactical, operational and strategic objectives.  NATOTerm.
Multinational interoperability must be honed through training  
and by lessons identified during operations

57
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
4
Employing UK land power
 
Key points
• Land forces have six operational themes: conventional warfare, irregular 
warfare, stability and peace support operations, engagement, humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief, and homeland resilience. Special operations 
are a cross-cutting capability.
• The UK has adopted an integrated approach, as described in Global 
Britain in a competitive age: The Integrated Review of Security, Defence, 
Development and Foreign Policy and Integrated Review Refresh 2023. 
Integrated action is Defence’s doctrinal tenet supporting the integrated 
approach.
• Multi-domain integration informs the way land forces fight and operate. 
When conducting multi-domain operations, land forces integrate and 
orchestrate multi-domain effects, through convergence, as part of the 
operational function. 
• The operational function translates strategy into tactics and converges  
multi-domain effects to support tactical activities executed through 
combined arms manoeuvre.

58
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
4
Employing UK land power
Notes

59
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)
Lexicon
Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
AFM   Army field manual 
AJP   Allied joint publication 
AMISOM  African Union Mission in Somalia
DCDC   Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
IDF   Israel Defense Forces
JDP   joint doctrine publication
MOD   Ministry of Defence
NATO   North Atlantic Treaty Organization
RAF   Royal Air Force
UK   United Kingdom 

60
JDP 0-20 (6th Edition)  
Lexicon
Section 2 – Terms and definitions
This section lists endorsed terms and definitions used in the publication.
division 
A major administrative and tactical unit/formation which combines in itself the 
necessary arms and services required for sustained combat, larger than a 
regiment/brigade and smaller than a corps. (NATOTerm)
environment 
The surroundings in which an organization operates, including air, water, land, 
natural resources, flora, fauna, humans, and their interrelations. (NATOTerm)
interoperability 
The ability to act together coherently, effectively and efficiently to achieve 
tactical, operational and strategic objectives. (NATOTerm)
land power 
The ability of land forces to exert decisive control and influence on actors and 
the course of events. (JDP 0-01.1)

[Page 71: No extractable text]

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2023Crown copyright 2023
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
The material in this publication is certified as an FSC mixed resourced product, fully recyclable and biodegradable.The material in this publication is certified as an FSC mixed resourced product, fully recyclable and biodegradable.


