The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
i 3rd Edition Change 1  
JOINT DOCTRINE PUBLICATION 3-00 
CAMPAIGN EXECUTION 
Joint Doctrine Publication 3-00 (JDP 3-00), (3rd Edition), October 2009, 
 is promulgated  
as directed by the Chiefs of Staff 
Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Development, Concepts and Doctrine) 
CONDITIONS OF RELEASE 
1. This information is Crown copyright and the intellectual property
rights for this publication belong exclusi
vely to the Ministry of
Defence (MOD).  No material or information contained in this
publication should be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form outside MOD establishments except as
authorised by both the sponsor and the MOD, where appropriate.
2.
This information may
 be subject to privately owned rights.
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
ii 3rd Edition Change 1  
AUTHORISATION 
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing Joint Doctrine Publications (JDPs) within a hierarchy of similar 
publications.  Readers wishing to quote JDPs as reference material in other work 
should confirm with the DCDC Doctrine Editor whether the particular publication and 
amendment state remains authoritative.  Comments on factual accuracy or proposals 
for amendment are welcomed by the Doctrine Editor at: 
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre 
Ministry of Defence 
Shrivenham  
SWINDON, Wiltshire, SN6 8
RF 
Telephone number: 01793 314216/7 
Military Network: 96161 4216/4217 
Facsimile number: 01793 314232 
Military Network: 96161 4232 
E-mail: dcdc-doceds@mod.uk
All images, or otherwise stated are: © crown copyright/MOD 2012. 
DISTRIBUTION 
Distribution of JDPs is managed by the Forms and Publications Section, LCSLS 
Operations Centre, C16 Site, Ploughley Road, Arncott, Bicester, OX25 1LP.  Requests 
for issue of this publication, or amendments to its distribution, should be referred to 
the LCSLS Operations Centre.  All other DCDC publications, including a regularly 
updated CD Joint Doctrine Disk (containing both JDPs and Allied Joint Publications 
(AJPs)), can also be demanded from the LCSLS Operations Centre. 
DSDA Help Desk: 01869 256052 
Military Network: 94240 2052 
All publications (including drafts) are available to view and download on the Defence 
Intranet (RLI) at: www.dcdc.dii.r.mil.uk 
This publication is available on the Internet at: www.mod.uk/dcdc 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
iii 3rd Edition Change 1  
JOINT DOCTRINE PUBLICATIONS 
The successful conduct of military operations requires an intellectually rigorous, 
clearly articulated and empirically-based framework of understanding that gives 
advantage to a country’s armed forces, and its likely partners, in the management of 
conflict.  This common basis of understanding is provided by doctrine. 
UK doctrine is, as far as practicable and sensible, consistent with that of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).  The development of national doctrine 
addresses those areas not covered adequately by NATO; it also influences the 
evolution of NATO doctrine in accordance with national thinking and experience. 
Endorsed national doctrine is promulgated formally in JDPs.1  From time to time, 
Interim JDPs (IJDPs) are published, caveated to indicate the need for their subsequent 
revision in light of anticipated changes in relevant policy or legislation, or lessons 
arising out of operations. 
Urgent requirements for doctrine are addressed through Joint Doctrine Notes (JDNs).  
To ensure timeliness, they are not subject to the rigorous staffing processes applied to 
JDPs, particularly in terms of formal external approval.  Raised by the DCDC, they 
seek to capture and disseminate best practice or articulate doctrinal solutions from 
which this can be developed for operations and training.   
Details of the joint doctrine development process and the associated hierarchy of JDPs 
are to be found in JDP 0-00 Joint Doctrine Development Handbook. 
RECORD OF AMENDMENTS 
Amendment No Date of Amendment Initials 
1 Formerly named Joint Warfare Publications (JWPs).  
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
iv 3rd Edition Change 1  
CHANGE 1 
Change 1 to JDP 3-00 Campaign Execution (3rd Edition) was promulgated in July 
2012.  Change 1 recasts the original Chapter 3 Campaign Execution into 2 chapters; 
Chapter 3 Joint Action and Chapter 4 Campaign Execution.  The original Chapter 4 
Assessment has been renumbered Chapter 5 Assessment.  It should be noted that there 
are no content updates in this chapter.  The new Chapter 3 Joint Action and Chapter 4 
Campaign Execution also provides updated or new doctrine on: 
 Joint Action.  The original Joint Action model has been revised to
recognise that:
 Influence is central to all military activity.  Accordingly, labelling a
discrete activity set as Influence Activities is unhelpful and
misleading.  Change 1 renames these as Information Activities.
 A wider range of activities other than fires, manoeuvre and
information activities contribute to campaign execution.  To reflect
this, capacity-building activities (such as security sector reform)
have been grouped together under the heading of outreach.
 Within the operating space we interact with a wide range of actors
and not simply adversaries.
 Strategic Communication.  Building on JDN 1/12 Strategic
Communication: The Defence Contribution and JDP 5-00 Campaign
Planning (2nd Edition Change 1), Change 1 to JDP-3-00 explains how
campaign execution is nested within the overall campaign narrative and
themes.
 Full Spectrum Targeting.  If influence is the overall outcome, a holistic
approach to targeting is required from the outset. This is enabled by a
deep understanding of target systems and their critical vulnerabilities.
With this understanding planners will be better able to select the most
effective and appropriate activity, lethal or non-lethal, to apply.
 Consequence Management.  In an environment where information flow
is increasingly prevalent, headquarters must be prepared to react to
incidents and events that may threaten campaign process.
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 v 3 rd Edition Change 1  
PREFACE 
1. Purpose.  JDP 3-00 Campaign Execution (3rd Edition) describes the 
integration, coordination, synchronisation and prioritisation of deployed multinational 
and national joint operations.  JDP 3-00 flows directly from JDP 01 Campaigning (2nd 
Edition) and together with JDP 5-00 Campaign Planning (2nd Edition), is the UK 
authority for the conduct of deployed joint operations.  It is aimed primarily at those 
responsible for the execution of operations, specifically the Chief of Staff (COS) Joint 
Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ) and component headquarters’ COS and their 
respective staffs.  It is a key document in delivery of joint command and staff training. 
2. Structure.  JDP 3-00 comprises 2 discrete parts: Part 1 Campaign Execution 
and Part 2 Assessment: 
a.  Part 1 is divided into 4 chapters: 
(1) Chapter 1 – Forming the Force.  Chapter 1 describes the 
command and control of a joint force, focusing on the requirements of a 
Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC), and other aspects of force 
generation.  Initially, it describes a model where the UK is in command 
of a Joint Force Headquarters, it then explores the most likely case; the 
UK as a contributing nation with a national contingent headquarters. 
(2) Chapter 2 – Component Contributions to Joint Operations. 
Chapter 2 describes the characteristics of 5 generic components.  Other 
joint force elements and their respective contributions to, and integration 
within, a Joint Task Force are also described.  Critically, it sets out 
alternatives to this model, such as fully integrated headquarters, and the 
circumstances under which they might be employed.     
(3) Chapter 3 – Joint Action.  Chapter 3, and its annexes, explore the 
concept of Joint Action as a mechanism for brigading types of military 
activity to deliver synergy and achieve influence effect. 
(4) Chapter 4 – Campaign Management.  Chapter 4 describes some 
of the mechanisms and considerations by which the JTFC integrates, 
coordinates and prioritises the activities executed by the components to 
achieve the campaign end-state. 
b. Part 2 comprises a single chapter.  Chapter 5 – Assessment describes 
the principles and processes of operational-level assessment. 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 vi 3 rd Edition Change 1  
LINKAGES 
3. JDP 3-00 is linked with: 
a. JDP 0-01 British Defence Doctrine (4th Edition). 
b. JDP 01 Campaigning( 2nd Edition). 
c. JDP 04 Understanding. 
d. JDP 2-00 Understanding and Intelligence Support to Joint Operations 
(3rd Edition). 
e. JDP 3-70 Battlespace Management. 
f. JDP 3-80 Information Activities Series.2 
g. JDP 5-00 Campaign Planning (2nd Edition Change 1). 
4. Multinational Operations.  The UK is most likely to work within 
multinational coalitions led by NATO, the US or France.  Although this doctrine is 
compatible with that of our major allies, it is not identical.  Knowledge of UK military 
doctrine is insufficient to prepare headquarters staff for commanding a multinational 
operation or working within a multinational headquarters.  Staff must be intimately 
familiar with the equivalent doctrine of the lead nation or organisation. 
a. Allied Doctrine.  While coherent with the thrust of Allied Joint 
Publications (AJPs) such as, AJP-01 (D) Allied Joint Doctrine and AJP-3(A) 
Allied Doctrine for Joint Operations, JDP 3-00 reflects important points of 
national emphasis highlighted in recent operations.  It has been designed to 
flow from JDP 01 Campaigning (2nd Edition) which offers specific guidance 
for JTFCs and national contingent commanders.  Where there are variances 
with multinational doctrine, UK joint doctrine has primacy for UK national, 
and UK-led, operations. 
b. Other Multinational Doctrine.  Useful guidance on operating within an 
ad hoc coalition can be found in the Multinational Interoperability Council 
Coalition Building Guide.  Equivalent US doctrine is centred on Joint 
Publication (JP) 3-0 Joint Operations and French doctrine on Doctrine Inter 
Armée (DIA) -03 Command.    
  
 
 
                                                           
2 Due to be promulgated in 2013. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 vii 3 rd Edition Change 1  
CAMPAIGN EXECUTION 
CONTENTS 
Title Page i 
Preface v 
Contents vii 
  
 PART 1 – CAMPAIGN EXECUTION  
  
Chapter 1 Forming the Force  
  
 Introduction 1-1 
  Joint Task Force Command and Control 1-4 
  National Contingent Command and Control 1-12 
Force Preparation 1-14 
 Annex 1A – Illustrative Template for Command  and 
Control of a UK Led National or Multinational Joint 
Operation 
 
 Annex 1B – Multinational Considerations  
 Annex 1C – Command State Definitions  
Appendix 1C1 – Comparison of Command and 
Control Authorities Using NATO and US Terms 
 
Annex 1D – US Africa Command – An Example of a 
Multi-agency Headquarters  
 
 Annex 1E – Illustrative Template of Multinational 
 Command and Control Arrangements with UK as a 
 Participating Nation in Multinational Major Combat 
 Operations 
 
Appendix 1E1 – Comparison of Permanent Joint 
Headquarters and National Contingent 
Headquarters’ Responsibilities  
 
 Annex 1F – Force Preparation  
  
Chapter 2  Component Contribution to Joint Operations    
  
 Componency 2-1 
  Maritime Component 2-8 
 Land Component 2-12 
 Air Component 2-15 
 Special Forces Component 2-19 
 Logistic Component 2-22 
 Joint Force Elements 2-25 
Annex 2A – Inter-Component Coordination and Liaison 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 viii 3 rd Edition Change 1  
Chapter 3  Joint Action   
  
 Strategic Communication  3-1 
 Joint Action  3-2 
 Types of Activities 3-5 
 Freedom of Action 3-9 
 Joint Action Bedrock Capabilities 3-11 
  Annex 3A – The Relationship between Fires and  
  Information Activities 
 
  Annex 3B – Joint Action Targeting Process  
  
Chapter 4 Campaign Management  
  
Command Factors 4-2 
Campaign Rhythm 4-4 
Consequence Management and Adaptation 4-7 
Information Superiority 4-9 
 Annex 4A – Joint Task Force Headquarters’ Groups, 
Boards and Meetings 
 
  
 PART 2 – ASSESSMENT  
   
Chapter 5 Assessment 
  
 Overview  5-1 
 Assessment Categories  5-4 
 Assessment Planning  5-6 
 Gathering Evidence  5-9 
 Evaluating Evidence  5-12 
 Assessment Support to Decision-making  5-13 
 Annex 5A – The Measurement of Effect Assessment 
 Sheet 
 
Appendix 5A1 – Example Measurement of Effect 
Assessment Sheet  
 
   Appendix 5A2 – Example Measurement of  
   Effect Reporting Matrix 
 
 Annex 5B – Presentation of Measurements of Effect   
 Annex 5C – Presentation of Campaign Effectiveness 
 Assessment  
 
 Annex 5D –Tailored Assessment Presentation  
  
Lexicon  
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-1 3rd Edition 
CHAPTER 1 – FORMING THE FORCE 
Chapter 1 describes the Command and Control (C2) of a joint force, focused on the 
requirements of a Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC), and other aspects of force 
preparation.  It sets out 2 broad models: where the United Kingdom (UK) is in 
command - a Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ), and where the UK is a 
contributing nation - a national contingent headquarters. 
Section I – Introduction 
Section II – Joint Task Force Command and Control 
Section III – National Contingent Command and Control 
Section IV – Force Preparation 
SECTION I – INTRODUCTION 
101. Operations are almost invariably joint, multinational and inter-agency .  Joint 
Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-00 Campaign Execution provides a JTFC or national 
contingent commander with the broad structures and processes to design a 
headquarters or staff structure that allows UK forces to operate effectively.  
Specifically, Chapter 1 articulates how a JTFC exercises C2 over the force and how 
the JTFHQ might be constructed to assist.  It also considers the overall force 
preparation process. 
102. Ideally, the construct of a force, its desired order and means of arrival in 
theatre should be driven by careful analysis of the specific situation.  Set within a 
context of clear political direction, this analysis should be informed through estim
ates 
at both the military strategic and operational levels.  However, such clarity is rare.  In 
practice the diplomatic situation will be dynamic as the UK Government is subjected 
to both internal and external pressures.  This may obscure any early articulation of 
strategic intent or the means to achieve it.  It may also preclude an early display of 
national commitment or, alternatively, demand ongoing adjustments to policy and 
direction.  As a consequence, military planning and preparations may have to be made 
with ambiguous strategic direction.  This may constrain the military options available.  
Alternatively, diplomatic requirements might demand a rapid demonstration of intent 
or intervention that compresses military planning timelines, with options driven by 
readiness profiles.  Even when time is available, resource and financial constraints 
may be key determinants for shaping the force structure, rather than military logic 
alone.  Therefore, the generic model for forming the force described in this Chapter is 
a guideline only and will require much judgement in its application.  Throughout, an 
appreciation of the political context and the flexibility to work within it will be crucial. 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-2 3rd Edition 
Operation Granby 1990-91 
Crisis in the Gulf emerged in the context of an end to the Cold War, from which the 
Treasury was keen to draw a peace dividend.  Initial deployment was driven by that 
which was available and sufficient to demonstrate political solidarity with the Gulf 
states, while avoiding the commitment of significant resources or portraying an overly 
aggressive stance, which might complicate diplomatic efforts. 
On the weekend of the initial invasion 2 squadrons of Tornado F3s (air defence 
variant) were, by chance, at RAF Akrotiri.  Their availability and defensive nature was 
in line with the political dynamic – they deployed.  At the same time, Jaguar aircraft 
represented the only easily deployable ground reconnaissance capability.  As an added 
bonus it could be supported by The Sultan of Oman’s Air Force, who also operated the 
Jaguar – they deployed too. 
It was only following this initial deployment that Air Vice Marshal Wilson asked the 
question, “What capability do we need?”  The answer was offensive counter air and 
tactical reconnaissance.  Although Tornado GR1 and GR1A were ultimately deployed, 
the Secretary of State, who had made public statements concerning “defensive 
deployments only”, took much convincing.  Indeed, serious consideration was given to 
basing GR1s in Akrotiri, despite the crews’ lack of air-to-air refuelling currency, 
which would have made credible air operations difficult.  
Joint Operations 
103. Joint operations involve contributions from 2 or more environments, and other 
joint force elements, under a unified command structure.  
These contributions may be 
brigaded into components, as shown at Annex 1A, particularly during major combat 
operations.  However, there are alternatives to the traditional component structure, 
which the doctrine covers in more detail at Chapter 2. 
Multinational Operations 
104. Combining the military capabilities of different nations brings depth and 
breadth to a force.  It also generates co
mplexity, uncertainty and risk, in almost direct 
proportion to the number of nations involved.  In practice, international consensus and 
legitimacy, rather than military preference or operational necessity, may drive 
multinational involvement and a commander must occasionally be prepared to accept 
the former at the expense of the latter.  The UK may operate with its formal allies on 
combined operations, or with others as part of ad hoc coalitions.  Annex 1B provides 
more detail on multinational operations.  
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-3 3rd Edition 
105. Fully Integrated Forces.  Fully integrated forces, to which nations may 
contribute in unequal shares, are comman
ded on a rotational or pro rata basis, from an 
integrated multinational headquarters, and often from fixed infrastructure.  Fully 
integrated forces can be used for North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Article 5 
Crisis Response Operations and other medium to large scale operations.  
106. Framework Nation.  Forces generated under a framework nation are 
commanded by an officer from that nation, which also provides a signifi
cant 
proportion of the staff and support to the headquarters.  It is also likely to dictate the 
procedures adopted. 
107. Lead Nation.  Forces generated under a lead nation are also commanded by an 
officer from that nation, from his own JTFHQ (augmented with liaison of
ficers, and 
potentially staff officers, from across the multinational force).  The lead nation is 
responsible for planning and executing the operation, to which others contribute 
national contingents and national contingent commanders. 
Multinational Command and Control 
108. NATO Command Arrangements.  NATO  uses: Operational Command 
(OPCOM); Operational Control (OPCON); Tactical Command (TACOM); and 
Tactical Control (TACON).  These are defined at Annex 1C, together with similar, but 
not identical, US terms at Appendix 1C1.  It should be noted that: 
a.      OPCOM of UK forces is retained by the UK (usually the Joint 
Commander), except when granted to a NATO commander fo
r Article 5 
operations. 
b.      OPCON is usually delegated to an appropriate NATO commander. 
109. Non-NATO Command Arrangements.  For national and non-NATO  
multinational operations with a UK lead, C2 architecture and doctrine generally 
mirrors the NATO model, with a UK JTFC or national contingent commander   
selected from the Joint Force Command Group.1  These commanders then normally 
pass TACOM to multinational or national subordinate tactical commanders. 
                                           
1 Certain command posts are permanently earmarked for the Joint Force Command Group, maintained to provide a pool 
of potential Joint Task Force (JTF), component, contingent or national contingent commanders.  Chief of Defence Staff 
(CDS) makes the final selection. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-4 3rd Edition 
Comprehensive Approach 
Joint Inter-agency Headquarters 
‘Management of the campaign was founded on a joint inter-agency task force 
approach, essential for operations amongst the people.  Other Government 
departments were given real influence over direction and, once empowered and 
properly resourced, proved both willing and able to deliver specific components of the 
campaign plan.  They added breadth to the military perspective.  The plan established 
3 interdependent ellipses of operation: security; governance; and social and economic 
development, all focused on Iraqi needs and measured by cultural sensitivity.’ 
Major General Salmon, General Officer Commanding Multinational District (South 
East) (MND(SE)) Post Operational Report Operation TELIC 12-13  
110. Creating the conditions necessary to achieve desired outcomes requires a 
m
ixture of diplomatic, military and economic measures, as well as effective 
collaboration between military and non-military actors, both across Government and 
including other national and multinational institutions, agencies and organisations.  
When building the JTFHQ, advisers and representatives from other government 
departments should be embedded from the outset.  However, some agencies will have 
a presence in a crisis area prior to military intervention and many may retain 
functional or other responsibilities after military forces have achieved their objectives 
and departed.  Once deployed, therefore, an even wider range of actors should be 
brought into the consultation, planning and execution processes of the JTFHQ.  Within 
certain context, the situation may demand that a bespoke headquarters is developed, 
which is not only joint but also genuinely inter-agency.  US Africa Command 
(AFRICOM) is an example of a joint and inter-agency headquarters and further details 
of its structure are at Annex 1D. 
US AFRICOM 
‘The designers of AFRICOM clearly understood the relationships between, 
development, diplomacy and prosperity in Africa.  As a result, AFRICOM reflects a 
much more integrated staff structure, one that includes significant management and 
staff representation by the Department of State, US Agency for International 
Development, and other US Government agencies involved in Africa.  The command 
also seeks to incorporate partner nations and humanitarian organisations, from Africa 
and elsewhere, to work alongside US staff on common approaches to shared 
interests.’2 
 
 
                                           
2 www.africom.mil 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-5 3rd Edition 
SECTION II – JOINT TASK FORCE COMMAND AND CONTROL 
111. The UK may either: 
a.      Act unilaterally under a UK JTFC and JTFHQ. 
b.      Lead a multinational force from a multinat ional JTFHQ. 
c.      Provide a UK contribution and national contingent commander/national 
contingent headquarters to a multinational force led by another nation. 
Joint Task Force Headquarters 
112. The standing Joint Force Headquarters (JFHQ) provides the nucleus for a UK-
provided JTFHQ/national contingent headquarters, but there are a numb
er of options: 
Type Structure 
Model A  Small, stand-alone headquarters comprising som e or all of JFHQ.  
Default for small-scale operations. 
Model B JFHQ augmented by the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ), front 
line commands and/or the 
Augmentation Manning List.  Default for a 
UK operational level headquarters. 
Model C Single-Service deployable headquarters with integrated JFHQ staff, 
augmented as necessary. 
Model D Single-Service headquarters adapted to form a JTFHQ/national 
contingent headquarters.  
Model E Bespoke headquarters with staff from all Services. 
Table 1.1 – Alternative Joint Task Force Headquarters 
113. Structure.  The mission, size and nature of the force, the extent of 
collaboration required with other actors and the preferences of the JTFC/
national 
contingent commander are key factors in the JTFC’s C2 Estimate and are used to 
determine the structure and procedures of a particular JTFHQ or national contingent 
headquarters.  JFHQ provides a model comprising: 
a.      Command and Staff Element.  A permanent cadre of approximately 55 
joint staff officers, clerical and administrative support staff, led by a 1* Chief 
of Joint Force Operations, augmented by up to 300 additional staff.  
b.      Command Support Element.  The command support element provides 
Communications and Information Syste
ms (CIS), as well as expeditionary life 
support and force protection for the headquarters. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-6 3rd Edition 
114. Deployment of a headquarters may be phased, its eventual composition 
reflecting a balance between capacity, en
durance, agility, efficiency, footprint and 
multinational and multi-agency representation.  A JTFC should exercise command 
from wherever he judges he can best influence events, usually from within the Joint 
Operations Area (JOA).  The optimum location will depend upon the nature of the 
operation and such factors as: 
a.      The need to interact with other elements of the force, indigenous forces, 
regional leaders and locally-based non-military agencies. 
b.      The ability to reachback to higher headquarters.  With adequate CIS, 
reaching back from a s
mall deployed headquarters allows a small footprint, a 
wider choice of locations and reduced logistic/force protection requirements. 
115. Augmentation.  The Defence Augmentation Cell provides a JTFHQ with 
specialist staff and enables 24-hour manning.  Primary augmentees are pre-nominated 
specialists held at high readiness to fill specific posts.  Secondary augmentees are 
general staff officers, held at lower readiness, with less definitive job specifications. 
Selection is determined by qualification, recommendation and availability.  The 
receiving headquarters should integrate augmentees as soon as possible after 
identification, especially if they have no previous experience together, in which case 
pre-deployment training is critical.  Operational requirements should be balanced 
against routine requirements, such as training and career development. 
Command 
116. Commander.  A JTFC3 is likely to have held previous command appointments 
as a component or contingent commander and have experience in joint and 
multinational headquarters.  His experience of working with other agencies may be 
variable.  A JTFC may benefit from the advice and counsel of an appointed mentor. 
117. Deputy Commander.  A deputy commander , if deployed, provides continuity 
when a JTFC is away from his headquarters.  Ideally, he should be senior to the 
subordinate tactical/component commanders and, in the interests of diversity, may be 
chosen from a non-lead or framework nation.  It is essential, however, that a deputy 
understands not only the JTFC’s intent but also his approach to command, in order to 
maintain tempo and avoid unnecessary friction. 
Headquarters Staff Roles and Organisation 
118. Table 1.2 contains guidance on staff roles and organisation.
                                        
   
3 Depending on the scale of an operation a UK Joint Task Force Commander can be anything from 4* to OF5. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1-7 3rd Edition 
Roles Organisational Structures Staff Categories 
Integration - Staff assist the JTFC to 
integrate augmentees within the headquarters.  Permanent staff are key to instilling unity of effort amongst multinational staff and augmentees. 
Planning - Although planning is 
focused in the J5 Division, all staff 
have a planning role, providing either 
direct assi
stance to the development of 
the plan or specialist input. 
Execution and Assessment - Staff  
coordinate and synchronise activities 
and, supported by assessment, provide feedback to the JTFC to inform iterative planning.  They keep higher 
commanders and headquarters 
informed on progress and represent the interests of subordinate formations to the JTFC. 
Decision Making - Staf
 f should have 
clear guidance on what decisions they 
are empowered to take, and what levels 
of risk they are authorised to carry. 
Ad-hoc Multi-Discipline Groups - 
bring staff together under temp
orary 
leadership to deal with particular issues and, on completion, the groups dissolve. 
Proponents - appointed to take forward, 
in a coherent manner, issues that cut 
across divi
sional boundaries.  
Permanent Re-organisation - for the 
duration of the campaign: 
Planning Focused - for example, J3 
and J5 staffs assigned to specific plan, refine and execute groupings. 
Output Focused -
 to support, for 
example, particular outputs or 
functions.  Permanent functiona
l 
structures have been trialled by the US.  They see headquarters organised into the 6 functional directorates of: Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR); Effects; Manoeuvre; Protect; Sustain; and CIS. 
Joint Staff Officers - form the core of 
the headquarters.  They are required to 
think and act at the operational level, 
yet understand tactical im
plications. 
Multinational Staff Officers - or 
embedded staff, provi
de expertise in 
functional areas and play a full part in the planning and conduct of multinational operations.   
Personal Staff - who support the 
JTFC, may include any or all of the 
following: m
ilitary assistant, aide de 
camp, personal assistant plus close protection and interpreters.   
Liaison Officers - high grade, 
motivated and em
powered liaison 
officers from nations and subordinate 
tactical formations, make a significant contribution to the effectiveness of a JTFHQ.  Translators or interpreters may be required to make liaison officers fully effective. 
 
Table 1.2 - Headquarters Staff Roles and Organisation 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1-8 3rd Edition 
 
        
 
   
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK)
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-9 3rd Edition 
Principal Staff Officers and Advisers 
119. Chief of Staff.  A Chief of S taff (COS) is responsible for operations, 
operations support, plans and intelligence.  He coordinates work across the 
headquarters, with particular responsibility for information management.  He is pivotal 
to the efficient running of the headquarters; a good COS can engender and sustain 
mutual trust and understanding between individual staff members, advisers and 
subordinate headquarters. 
120. Deputy Chief of Staff.  A Deputy COS (DCOS) coordinates logistics, 
personnel and often finance.  
Though normally of equivalent rank, the COS is primus 
inter pares. 
121. Policy Adviser.  The Policy Adviser (POLAD) advises a JTFC on the 
international, regional and local political context, as well as UK Govern
ment policy. 
122. Legal Adviser.  A Legal Adviser (LEGAD) provides legal advice and is 
pivotal to all aspects of planning and execution.  Targeting and rules of engagement, 
for instance, will demand his close scrutiny and input.   
123. Media Adviser.  Proactive engagement with the media is crucial to the 
maintenan
ce of campaign authority and therefore strategic effect, both internationally 
and locally.  While the JTFC cannot control the media, he must understand how to 
interact positively with it in order to maintain confidence and influence, if not overt 
support.  A media adviser, ideally from Director Media Communications’ department, 
brings technical and cultural understanding of media processes and agendas.  This 
shapes not only direct media engagement, but also wider activity, through better 
understanding of how events are likely to be reported and perceived. 
124. Scientific Advisers.  Scientific Advisers (SCIADs), when embedded, provide 
operational analysis support to pl
anning, execution and assessment.  
125. Subject Matter Experts.  A JTFC may em ploy subject matter experts to 
advise on local or regional issues.  They may, for example, be indigenous or foreign 
academics who provide guidance on culture, economy and religion.   
126. Interpreter or Translator Support.  Skilled and experienced interpreters or 
translators enhance a JTFHQ considerably.  However,
 locally employed civilians, 
while readily available, may not always be impartial or reliable.       
Staff Divisions 
127. J1 - Personnel and Administration.  The principal role of J1 is personnel 
support for ma
npower accounting (including operational location tracking), casualty 
reporting and tracking, management of welfare enablers (including the Deployed 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-10 3rd Edition 
Welfare Package (Overseas)), discipline, honours and awards.  J1 staff set theatre 
policy for prisoners of war, internees and detainees.  
128. J2 - Intelligence.  J2 responds to the commander ’s intent and specifically to 
the commander’s critical information requirements.  It answers, but also shapes, the 
requirements of the JTFC and others, using information and intelligence from PJHQ, 
the Defence Intelligence Staff, national and multinational agencies, and that provided 
by organic resources within the JOA.  An Operational Intelligence Support Group, if 
deployed, provides assessed and fused intelligence from national agencies.  A crucial 
relationship is that which is forged between the commander and his Chief of 
Intelligence.  Only when J2 properly comprehend the commander’s intent can J2 staff 
effectively hunt for the critical information requirements.  JDP 2-00 Intelligence 
provides more detail.   
129. J3 - Operations.  J3 is the focus for execution and continuous assessment.  It 
is responsi
ble for the production and issue of directives and Operation Orders 
(OPORDs), liaison and reporting.  J3 is organised into functional cells: 
a.      J3 - Current Operations.  The role of the Current Operations (J33) Cell 
is to execute plans and draft Fragmentary Orde
rs (FRAGOs).  J33 monitors 
and manages the immediate situation, including measurement of activity, 
through the Joint Operations Centre.  Within this Centre, the Operations 
Coordination (Ops Coord) Cell ensures that information is appropriately 
managed, through reports and returns. 
b.      J3 - Future Operations.  The Future Operations (J35) Cell develops 
and refines Operation Plans (OPLANs) and Contingency Plans (CONPLANs), 
produced by J5, to form OPORDs.  Responsibility between J33, J35 and J5 is 
usually defined by time: for exam
ple; up to 96 hours (asking the question what 
is?); 96 hours to 7 days (what if?); and beyond 7 days (what next?).  The time 
lines will vary with the level of headquarters and operational tempo. 
c.      J3 - Operations Support.  The Operations Support Cell is the focus for 
specialist and pan-JTFHQ Operations Support activities.  It encom
passes fires 
and influence activities, air defence, force protection and measurement of 
effect.  Other specialists, such as joint force engineers, may also be brigaded 
here. 
130. J4 - Logistics.  J4 sets theatre logistic policy and establishes logistic and 
movement priorities within the JOA, providing an interface with
 the Joint Force 
Logistic Component (JFLogC)/National Support Element.  J4 has discrete cells for 
supply, movement and transportation, equipment support, contractors deployed on 
operations, contracted logistics and medical support. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-11 3rd Edition 
 
131.  J5 - Plans.  J5 develops the JTFC’s cam paign plan, produces the Campaign 
Directive and coordinates the production of the Force Instruction Document.  J5 
conducts regular campaign effectiveness assessment, and plans for future operations 
through the development of OPLANs.  It coordinates planning with both higher and 
subordinate formations, as well as other agencies.  J5 also develops CONPLANS in 
conjunction with J35.  JDP 5-00 Campaign Planning provides more detail. 
132. J6 - Communications and Information Systems.  J6 and Commander Joint 
Force CIS provide CIS for operations and meet the information exchange requirement.  
They plan and control in-theatre CIS architectures, in
cluding integration at the 
strategic and tactical interfaces, supported by a joint network centre responsible for 
network engineering.  At medium-scale and above, a joint force CIS element, drawn 
from within PJHQ J6, is configured to coordinate CIS effort across the JOA.  JDP 6-00 
Communications and Information Systems Support to Joint Operations provides the 
detail. 
133. J7 - Doctrine and Training.  J7 provides doctrine, training, lessons and 
standards support.4  For joint exercises and force preparation, J7 conducts special-to- 
JOA and in-theatre training to assist a JTFC and some tactical/component 
commanders.  J7 is responsible for after-action review and contributes to the Defence 
lessons process, using the Defence Lessons Identified Database, and post operational 
reporting.  J7 also supports the development of doctrine by the Development, 
Concepts and Doctrine Centre.  
134. J8/J9 - Finance/Civil Secretariat.  The scale and comp lexity of an operation 
determines whether separate J8 (Finance) and J9 (Civil Secretariat) Divisions are 
required.  J8 acts as the focus for contracts and budgets, although some aspects may be 
delegated to the DCOS or subordinate tactical/component commanders.  The POLAD 
is responsible for J9. 
135. Joint Force Elements.   Joint Force Elements, which provide specialist cross-
component capabilities, demand C2 at the JTF level.  They are lik
ely to be brigaded 
under the control of a specific commander, and his supporting staff, normally 
embedded within the JTFHQ.   Specialist coordination at this level provides a pan-
Joint Operational Area view and the ability to re-balance resources across the JTF.  
Further details are at Chapter 2. 
                                           
4 Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) only.  There is no J7 division in JFHQ.  This function is discharged by J3/7 when 
not deployed. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-12 3rd Edition 
SECTION III – NATIONAL CONTINGENT COMMAND AND 
CONTROL 
136. Any UK contribution to a multinational operation commanded by another 
nation is term
ed a national contingent, commanded by a national contingent 
commander (or equivalent at multinational tactical/component level).  Illustrative C2 
arrangements are at Annex 1E.  At small scale, where UK forces may be assigned 
without a national contingent headquarters, the Joint Commander, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Defence (MOD), should nevertheless nominate a senior UK officer to 
represent UK force elements.5 
137. National Contingent Commander.  As a contributing nation to a 
mu
ltinational force, the UK usually embeds a national contingent commander within 
the JTFHQ.  The UK force, which should be self-sustaining, may consist of a range of 
environmental contingents with commanders placed within respective 
tactical/component headquarters.  The JTFC exercises command across the Joint Task 
Force (JTF), subject to delegated national C2 authority, while a national contingent 
commander directs the employment of UK forces in the execution of their allocated 
tasks.  He retains a minimum of OPCON but is likely to pass TACOM to appropriate 
JTFC/component commanders.  In addition, he informs the MOD of developments 
that may affect national political objectives, rules of engagement, and the tasking of 
UK forces.  Further detail is given within Chapter 2. 
138. Relationship between the UK Joint Commander and the National 
Contingent Commander.  When operating as a contributing nation within an alliance 
or coalition, both the PJHQ and national contingent headquarters will be required to 
interact with the m
ultinational JTFHQ, in order to shape the conduct of operations.  
Notwithstanding any formal delegation of C2 authority from the Joint Commander to 
a national contingent commander, the division of responsibility between PJHQ and the 
national contingent headquarters, particularly at the operational level, must be made 
explicit within the Chief of the Defence Staff’s (CDS’) and Joint Commander’s 
Directives.  Appendix 1E1 provides an example. 
139. Emphasis within a National Contingent Headquarters.  Although a national 
contingent command
er may not have discrete operational planning responsibility, it is 
essential that he fully integrates his J5 staff into the overall planning process.  This 
allows a national contingent commander to track and influence the development of the 
campaign plan, in order to ensure best use of UK forces and avert conflict with 
national objectives.  Though a national contingent headquarters will not replicate all 
                                           
5 Choices include: the commander of the national support element; or the senior UK commander of a relevant port of 
disembarkation; or another specially nominated commander. 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-13 3rd Edition 
JTFHQ staff functions, nor conduct a similar range of activities, it should still be 
robust, with a 24/7 capacity to link out to and across national and international 
networks, both military and inter-agency.  When UK interests are to the fore, a 
national contingent headquarters may need to respond swiftly to reinforce cohesion, 
allay domestic concerns, promote success or minimise the impact of unforeseen 
setbacks. 
140. Embedded Staff.  UK staff officers shoul d be embedded within any 
multinational JTFHQ.  They should focus on direct support to the headquarters, rather 
than national issues; their role is discrete from that of national contingent headquarters 
staff.  Nevertheless, they should ensure that JTF planning and activity is conducted 
with a comprehensive understanding of the capabilities, limitations and constraints of 
UK forces, so maximising their potential.  Though operating within disparate staff 
branches, embedded staff will be represented nationally by a senior British military 
adviser who, in the absence of a national contingent headquarters, acts as the principal 
link to PJHQ.  Once a national contingent headquarters is deployed, the Senior British 
Military Adviser is likely to become the principal liaison officer between the JTFHQ 
and national contingent headquarters.  At lower levels, embedded JTFHQ staff should 
liaise closely with relevant staff branches within the national contingent headquarters. 
141. Lead or Framework Nation Staff Procedures.  Staf f procedures within a 
JTFHQ are likely to be dictated by the lead or framework nation: most likely the US.  
UK staff at all levels, whether embedded or interacting with the JTFHQ as part of a 
national contingent, component or tactical headquarters, should therefore develop, 
prior to an operation, an intimate understanding of the lead/framework nation’s 
command and staff approach, culture and detailed processes.  Not only will this 
generate greater clarity, situational awareness and, ultimately, tempo but also help 
build confidence, trust and mutual respect.  In particular, UK staff with previous 
experience of training and operating with the lead/framework nation should be fully 
exploited. 
“The American battle rhythm was extraordinary.  It was really intensive, and between 
the GOC and I, we conducted 6 Video Teleconferences  in person to MNC-I every 
week, in addition to producing all the Situation Reports (SITREPs) and responding to 
the American Reports and Returns (R2) requirements.  Their divisional headquarters 
generate huge amounts of staff work. You have to take what they ask for 
seriously. You have to be demonstratively contributing to the Coalition, you have to 
be transparent, and you have to be honest and open in your dealings with them.  We 
ended up using the American staff products like Story Boards and Combined 
Information Data Network Exchange, most of which were very good indeed.”   
Colonel D C M King, COS MND (SE) Operation TELIC 12-13
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

 JDP 3-00 
 1-14 3rd Edition 
SECTION IV – FORCE PREPARATION 
142. Graduated Readiness.  Maintaining large deployabl e forces at high readiness 
is inefficient.  The UK operates the principle of graduated readiness, by which Armed 
Forces are held at varying levels of preparedness to ensure an effective response by an 
appropriate force when required.  The warning time is the period between first 
indication of a potential crisis and the point at which committed forces are to be ready 
for operations in theatre.  Its main elements, illustrated at Figure 1.3,  are: 
a.      Lead-In Time.  The period from first indication of a crisis until the 
political decision to deploy forces. 
b.      Decision to Deploy.   A decision to deploy effectively authorises those 
activities that force elements must complete in order to be able to deploy 
within their readiness times, for exam
ple: recall of regular personnel; outload 
of stores from depots; logistic uplift; mobilisation of reserves; and focused 
training specific to the operation. 
c.      Activation Time.   The time fr om when a decision to deploy is made 
until deployed forces are able to deliver the desired effect. 
d.      Readiness.  The time required for force elements to be ready fo r 
deployment. 
e.      Deployment.  The period required to deploy force elements into theatre.  
It is largely a function of the size and com
position of the force, distance and 
available lift. 
f.      In-Theatre Preparation.  The time required to be ready for operations, 
including acclimatisation, integration and tactical deployment. 
 
Figure 1.3 – UK’s Preparedness Model 
143.  Annex 1F describes the process of force preparation in detail. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1A-1 3rd Edition 
ANNEX 1A – ILLUSTRATIVE TEMPLATE FOR 
COMMAND AND CONTROL OF A UK LED NATIONAL OR 
MULTINATIONAL JOINT OPERATION 
Component                                   Commanded by                                Abbreviated Title
Maritime       Joint Force Maritime Component Commander JFMCC
Land       Joint Force Land Component Commander JFLCC
Air       Joint Force Air Component Commander JFACC
Special Forces    Joint Force Special Forces Component Commander JFSFCC
Logistic                Joint Force Logistic Component Commander JFLogCC
 
Figure 1A.1 – C2 of UK Led National or Multinational Joint Operation 
Note:  In some circumstances the integration of component headquarters into a single 
headquarters may be more appropriate.  This is explored in depth within Chapter 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1A-2 3rd Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1B-1 3rd Edition 
ANNEX 1B – MULTINATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
1B1. United Kingdom (UK) participation in multinational operations is conducted 
under the auspices of a mandate using forces allocated to the North Atlantic T
reaty 
Organization (NATO), under different alliance arrangements, or on an ad hoc basis.  
Any mandate will be derived from international law, not exclusively from a United 
Nations Security Council resolution.  When an operation is not led by NATO or the 
European Union (EU), it is known as a coalition operation with the member states 
known as coalition partners. 
1B2. Multinational Cooperation.  Effective interaction and cooperation with 
m
ultinational partners stems from the following principles: 
a.      Rapport.  Effective personal relationships between politicians and 
military leaders will influence mu
ltinational cooperation at all levels and 
commanders must strive to develop a genuine rapport. 
b.      Respect.  Mutual respect for the professional ability, culture, history, 
religion, customs and values of participants strengthens relationshi
ps.  The 
Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC) should foster a constructive culture, 
which focuses on the positive aspects of national contributions. 
c.      Knowledge.  Time taken to understand the doctrine, capabilities and 
aspirations of partners will pay dividends.  It is important that nations are given 
a role commensurate with their capability. 
d.      Patience.  Differences of opinion, perspective and understanding may 
generate friction.  Effective cooperation takes time and patience to develop. 
1B3. Advantages of Multinati
onal Cooperation.  Multinational cooperation 
allows political and military ob
jectives to be achieved when unilateral action would be 
insufficient or undesirable.  Merging the capabilities of different military forces adds 
depth (strength in numbers) and breadth (additional capabilities), as well as providing 
access to national and regional infrastructure and, potentially, logistics, information 
and intelligence. 
1B4. Risks in Multinational Operations.  The more obvious risks are: 
a.      Mission Development and Mission Creep.  Mission development is 
the maturing of the m
ission as a result of a logical review of the campaign plan 
through detailed assessment.  Mission creep, however, is involvement in 
activities that are not directly related to the achievement of the agreed end-
state.  The consequences of mission creep could be significant in a 
multinational context, where national political and military aims may be 
substantially different. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1B-2 3rd Edition 
b.      Lack of Interoperability.  A lack of interoperability may introduce 
significant risk.  Procedural, tactical and technical differences may prevent 
force elements from working effectively together.  An inability to 
communicate, exchange information or 
use common logistic assets can cause 
friction. 
c.      Tempo.  The level of multinationality and extent of integration im pacts 
on tempo.  High tempo is difficult to achieve in the early stages of a campaign, 
particularly where coalitions consist of unfamiliar partners. 
d.      Rules of Engagement.  All participants within a multinational force 
shoul
d adhere to common and consistent Rules of Engagement, agreed prior to 
a campaign.  This will avoid ambiguity or inconsistency.  However, nations 
inevitably impose restrictions, which commanders must understand and factor 
into operations. 
1B5. Other Factors.  Additional factors that can affect the ex ecution of 
multinational operations include: 
a.      Decision-Making.  A JTFC should recognise the need to involve 
participating nations within his decision-making and conduct regular brie
fings.  
In particular, face-to-face engagement and constant dialogue will significantly 
improve shared understanding, both of the challenges faced and the solutions 
required.  Conversely, limited engagement and weak dialogue risks 
misunderstanding and miscalculation. 
b.      Language.  The lead or framework nation decides upon which language 
will be employed within the Joint Task Force Headquarters and for 
communication between levels of command.  English is invariably used when 
the UK or US is involved.  This m
ay, however, affect understanding within 
other nations’ staff and force elements.  Language difficulties can be 
ameliorated by early identification of interpreter requirements.  When 
employing contractors, however, headquarters staff should apply appropriate 
security procedures. 
c.      Culture.  An appreciation of the cultural differences within a 
m
ultinational force and between the force and an indigenous population is 
important.  All troops should receive cultural awareness training.  
Commanders should then consider more in-depth courses for personnel 
working closely with the local population.  They should also consider 
employing subject matter experts to provide cultural advice and contribute to 
analysis and assessment. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1B-3 3rd Edition 
d.      Sovereignty.  J5 staff should consider sovereignty at an early stage in 
the planning process.  Issues include local assistance and basing, overflight 
rights, air and sea ports of dise
mbarkation, information and intelligence 
gathering and general access to areas adjacent to the Joint Operations Area. 
Standardisation Mechanisms 
1B6. Standardisation in doctrine, procedures and equipment with allies and potential 
coalition partners is a practical expression of
 cooperation.  It will impact directly upon 
the extent to which the commander can integrate force elements, and thus his freedom 
of action.  There are 3 levels of standardisation: commonality, interchangeability and 
compatibility.  While the commander will be unable to influence levels of 
standardisation once the campaign is underway, an appreciation of standardisation 
levels between force elements, and the mechanisms by which they are generated, will 
shape the planning and conduct of activities.  The UK participates in several 
standardisation programmes. 
1B7. North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.  The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
(NATO) standardisation process encompasses the promulgation of standardisation 
agreements and allied publications, which are based on standardisation objectives, 
derived from the NATO Standardisation Programme and standardisation proposals.  
The Director of the NATO Standardisation Agency coordinates it. 
1B8. American-British-Canadian-Australian Armies.  The American-British-
Canadian-Australian (ABCA) 
Armies organisation (which also includes New Zealand) 
is instrumental in exchanging information, establishing standards and conducting 
exercises to promote standardisation. 
1B9. Air Standardisation Interoperability Committee.  The Air S tandardisation 
Interoperability Committee is the US, UK, Canadian, Australian and New Zealand air 
forces standardisation organisation.  It establishes mutual air standards and where 
appropriate adopts NATO standardisation agreements. 
1B10. AUSCANNZUKUS Organisation.  In 1978, the navies of Australia, Canada, 
New Zealand, UK and US creat
ed a naval Command and Control (C2) board to 
establish a seamless information infrastructure across all nations.  In 1996 the 
organisation shifted its principal focus from communications to information 
management. 
1B11.  Combined Communications-Electronic Board.  The Combi ned 
Communications-Electronic Board comprises senior Communications and Information 
Systems (CIS) staff from Australia, Canada, New Zealand, UK and US.  Its purpose is 
to examine CIS interoperability; the majority of current allied communications 
publications have been developed by the Board and endorsed for NATO use. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1B-4 3rd Edition 
1B12. Multinational Interoperability Council.  The Multinational Interoperability 
Council (MIC) comprises senior operations, doctrine, C2, communications and 
intelligence of
ficials from Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, UK and US.  It 
provides a forum for identifying interoperability issues and articulating actions which, 
if nationally implemented, would contribute to more effective coalition operations. 
1B13. Quinquepartite Combined Joint Warfare Conference.  The Quinquepartite 
Combined Joint 
Warfare Conference is a 1* grouping comprising Australia, Canada, 
New Zealand, UK and US.  Its aim is to facilitate interoperability across the 5 nations, 
particularly at the operational and strategic levels. 
1B14. Five Power Defence Agreement.  The Five Power Defence Agreement, which 
includes 
Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore and the UK, was established in 
1971 to assure the security of Malaysia and Singapore following the withdrawal of UK 
forces from Suez.  While defence capabilities of Malaysia and Singapore have 
improved substantially and security is no longer the principal driver for perpetuating 
the agreement, all nations continue to place great importance on it.  Nations 
collaborate on a range of defence issues, notably through multinational exercises. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
1C-1 
  3rd Edition 
ANNEX 1C – COMMAND STATE DEFINITIONS 
COMMAND FULL  
(1) 
OPCOM 
(2) 
OPCON 
(3) 
TACOM 
(4) 
TACON 
(5) 
UC ADMIN 
LESS (6) 
UC 
ADMIN (7)
UCDM 
(8) 
1.  Assign Separate Employment of 
components of Units/Formations 
X X       
2.  Assign Missions X X X      
3.  Assign Tasks X X X X     
4.  Delegate Equal C2 Status X X(9) X(9) X(9)     
5.  Delegate Lower C2 Status X X X X     
6.  Coordination of local movement, 
real estate and area defence 
X X X X X    
7.  CSS responsibilities X     X X X 
Note Definition 
1 Full Command.  Authority and responsibility of a commander to issue orders to subordinates.  It covers every aspect of military operations 
and administration and exists only within national services.  The term command, as used internationally, implies a lesser degree of authority 
than when used in a purely national sense.  No NATO or coalition commander has Full Command over forces assigned to him since, in 
assigning forces to NATO, nations will delegate only OPCOM or OPCON. 
2 Operational Command.  Authority granted to a commander to assign missions or tasks to subordinate commanders, to deploy units, to 
reassign forces, and to retain or delegate OPCON/TACON as necessary.  It does not include responsibility for administration. 
3 Operational Control.  Authority delegated to a commander to direct forces assigned so that he may accomplish specific missions or tasks, 
usually limited by function, time or location; to deploy units concerned, and to retain or assign TACON of those units.  It does not include 
authority to assign separate employment of components of the units concerned nor does it include administrative or logistic control. 
4 Tactical Command.  Authority delegated to a commander to assign tasks to forces under his command for the accomplishment of the mission 
assigned by higher authority. 
5 Tactical Control.  The detailed direction and control of movements or manoeuvres necessary to accomplish missions or tasks. 
6 Under Command for Administration (with caveats).  When the temporary nature of command makes a complete change of administrative 
command unnecessary, a formation or unit may be placed under command for certain matters, or for admin less certain matters (UK only). 
7 Under Command for Administration.  This implies complete transfer of administrative/logistic command.  Includes J1 matters (UK only). 
8 Under Command for Daily Maintenance.  When the temporary nature of command makes it unnecessary to effect a complete change of 
administrative command, a formation or unit may be placed under command for certain specific matters, or administration less certain 
administrative matters (UK only). 
9 Only with agreement of the commander holding the higher level of command status. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
1C-2 
  3rd Edition 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1C1-1  3 rd Edition 
APPENDIX 1C1 – COMPARISON OF COMMAND AND 
CONTROL AUTHORITIES USING NATO AND US TERMS 
Direct authority to deal with DOD,
US diplomatic missions, agencies
Coordinate CINC boundary
Granted to a command
Delegated to a command
Set chain of command to forces
Assign mission/designate
objective
Assign tasks
Direct/employ forces
Establish maneouvre
control measures
Reassign forces
Retain OPCON
Delegate OPCON
Assign TACOM
Delegate TACON
Retain TACON
Deploy forces within threatre
Local direction/control
designated forces
Assign separate employment
of unit components
Directive authority for logistics
Direct joint training
Excersise command of
US forces in MNF
Assign/reassign subordinate
commanders/officers
Conduct internal discipline
Authority US
COCOM
US
OPCON
NATO
OPCOM
NATO
OPCON
CSC/USFK
CONBINED
OPCON
NATO
TACOM
US &
NATO
TACON
Most control Least control
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
xxx
x
xx
xx x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
with approval
May suspend
or recommend
reassignment
has this authority
denied this authority or not specifically granted
x Combatant Command
Operational Command
Operational Control
Tactical Command
Tactical Control
COCOM
OPCOM
OPCON
TACOM
TACON
Legend
x
x
x
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1C1-2  3 rd Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1D-1 3rd Edition 
ANNEX 1D – UNITED STATES AFRICA COMMAND - AN EXAMPLE OF A  
MULTI-AGENCY HEADQUARTERS 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
Military lead
US Government Senior Executive Service lead
Special Staff
Spec Asst to the
Commander
(IMA)
Deputy to the
Commander
Civ-Mil Activities
Development
Advisor
Director for
Outreach
Director for
C4S &
Chief Info Officer
Director for
Intel & Knowledge
Development
Deputy Director
for Outreach
Strategic
Communication
Division
Partnership
Division
C4 Operations &
Plans Division
Deputy to the
Commander
Military Ops
Office of the
CSM
Spec Asst to the
Commander
(Interagency)
Office of Shared
Services
AFRICOM
Liaison Office
Chief of Staff
Director for
Strategy, Plans &
Programs
Director for Joint
Force Develop-
ment & Readiness
Director for
Operations &
Logistics
Director for
Resources
Deputy CIO &
Dep Dir for C4S
C4 Enterprise
Service Division
Analysis &
Production
Mgt Division
Programs &
Architecture
Division
Intel Security
Cooperation & En-
gagement Division
Knowledge
Development
Division
IKD-M
(Molesworth)
Deputy
Director for IKD
Operations &
Plans Division
C4 Capability &
Assurance
Division
CI & HUMINT
Division
IKD-T
(T ampa)
Director for
Programs
Programs
Division
North
Engagement
Division
South/East
Engagement
Division
West/Central
Engagement
Division
Offices of
Security
Cooperation
Director for
Strategy &
Plans
Plans
Division
Strategy,
Theater Posture,
& Policy Division
Deputy
Director for
Operations
Standing Joint
Force HQ
Core Element
Current
Operations
Division
Future
Operations
Division
Information
Operations
Division
Anti-Terrorism
Division
Deputy
Director for
Logistics
Deployment &
Distribution Ops
Center
Logistics
Support
Division
Engineering
Division
Medical
Division
Deputy
Director for
Resources
Dep Director
for Reserve
Affairs (IMA)
Office of Integration
Comptroller
Division
Human
Resources
Division
HR Theater Plans
& Programs
Division
Strategic
Capabilities &
Analysis Division
Direct Disclosure Office
Commander
USAFRICOM
AFRICOM contains approximately 1,300 Staff, half of which are civilians. Civilian personnel are drawn from military and non-military agencies of the US Government.
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1D-2 3rd Edition 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1E-1 3rd Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEX 1E – ILLUSTRATIVE TEMPLATE FOR MULTINATIONAL COMMAND 
AND CONTROL ARRANGEMENTS WITH UK AS A PARTICIPATING NATION IN 
MULTINATIONAL MAJOR COMBAT OPERATIONS 
NATO/EU
UN/OSCE
LEAD OR
FRAMEWORK
NATION
OTHER
NATIONS PJHQUK
Multinational Comd UK NCC
Multinational
Headquarters UK Staff
Maritime
Component
Land
Component
Air
Component
Multinational
Joint Logistic
Centre (1)
SF
Component (2)
Multinational
Maritime
Elements
UK
Maritime
Contingent
Multinational
Land
Elements
UK
Land
Contingent
Multinational
Air
Elements
UK
Air
Contingent
Multinational
Support
Elements
UK
Support
Contingent
Multinational
SF
Elements
UK
SF
Contingent
Legend
Command
National CommandCoordination
Notes1. Formed around the logistic staff of theframework nation. It should be noted that theMJLC does not have national commandarrangements. It performs a coordinationfunction only.2. C2 of SF will be promulgated on a case bycase basis.
MOD
UK
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1E-2 3rd Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1E1-1 3rd Edition 
APPENDIX 1E1 – COMPARISON OF PERMANENT JOINT 
HEADQUARTERS AND NATIONAL CONTINGENT 
HEADQUARTERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES 
Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) National Contingent Headquarters (NCHQ) 
Strategic Operational Tactical 
Prepare, Project & Sustain Employ Forces 
 Joint Commander commands all UK forces. 
 MOD/front line command interface. 
Command 
and Control 
 National command of UK 
forces executing authorised 
tasks in the JOA. 
 Staff UK issues arising in 
JOA. 
 Deployment, sustainment and recovery of UK 
forces. 
 Brief military strategic authority. 
 Obtain agreement to changes in agreed UK 
tasks. 
Planning  Influence multinational 
activity and integrate 
national effort into 
multinational plans. 
 Identify changes to agreed 
UK tasks, scope and 
confirm acceptability 
through Joint Commander. 
 Intelligence fusion (other agencies).1 
 Evaluate Joint Operations Area (JOA) 
assessments. 
Intelligence  Integration with 
multinational Joint Task 
Force Headquarters J2 and 
JOA analysis.2 
 Command and Control (C2) of the coupling 
bridge. 
 Direct front line commands and Defence 
Equipment and Support to deploy UK forces 
according to the joint desired order of arrival 
as agreed with the multinational Joint Task 
Force Commander (JTFC). 
Logistics  Provide PJHQ with the 
Joint Desired Order of 
Arrival Staff Table as 
agreed with the 
multinational JTFC. 
 Direct sustainment priorities 
for the coupling bridge. 
 Interpret MOD policy. 
 Issue J1 direction. 
Personnel  Implement personnel 
policy. 
 J1 direction to UK forces. 
 MOD policy for clinical/operational medical 
support and clinical governance/audit. 
Medical  Responsible for health of 
deployed UK force. 
 Coordinate all JOA bookings. Finance  Manage budget for national 
contingent headquarters. 
 Monitor, direct & guide. 
 Longer term media strategy. 
Media  Operational level media 
nexus. 
 Release authority. 
 Consequence management 
with MOD, in parallel with 
PJHQ. 
                                           
1 The deployed headquarters will also interact directly with other MOD, and wider national, agencies, both providing and 
receiving intelligence products. 
2 The National Contingent Headquarters will not only address issues of organisational and structural integration but will 
also act as the conduit for national intelligence feeds into the Joint Task Force Headquarters. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1E1-2 3rd Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1F-1 3rd Edition 
ANNEX 1F – FORCE PREPARATION 
Identification of Force Requirements 
1F1. Permanent Joint Headquarters Operations Teams.  Once an operation is 
underway, the focus of Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) staf
f effort moves from 
J5 to J3.  Contingency Planning Team members form the nucleus of an Operations 
Team under the J3 Operations Team Leader.  The Operations Team controls 
deployment, sustainment and recovery and in due course acts as the single interface 
between the Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ), the Defence Crisis Management 
Organisation, front line commands and multinational or multi-agency partners.  JDP 5-
00 Campaign Planning provides more detail. 
1F2. Joint Force Headquarters Situational Awareness.  The Joint Force 
Headquarters (JFHQ) forms a Situation 
Awareness Group to monitor any developing 
crisis in parallel with PJHQ.  Though limited in capability, it is the focus for briefing 
and initial planning.  If the JFHQ is not subsequently chosen as the JTFHQ, the 
Situation Awareness Group is still likely to migrate initially to the headquarters 
selected.  Situational awareness is promoted by the deployment of an Operational 
Liaison and Reconnaissance Team. 
1F3. Transition from an Operational Liaison and Reconnaissance Team to a 
Joint Ta
sk Force Headquarters.  Should an Operational Liaison and Reconnaissance 
Team transition into a JTFHQ, without returning to the UK, it must be configured to 
command from the outset.  The headquarters must be operational before the Joint Task 
Force (JTF) is built. 
1F4. Joint Statement of Requirement.  On completion of the m ilitary strategic 
estimate, PJHQ J5 produces a Joint Statement of Requirement.  It includes: the Joint 
Commander’s intent, outline courses of action and capabilities required, an outline 
sustainability statement, and constraints. 
1F5. Joint Force Element Table.  The Joint St atement of Requirement is issued to 
front line commands, Defence Equipment and Support and other force element 
providers, who then generate single-Service force element tables to meet the demands 
of concurrent operational level planning.  The PJHQ J4 Joint Mounting Cell 
consolidates the force element tables into a Joint Force Element Table, which provides 
an authoritative list of assigned force element tables.  It also assists in managing 
deployment, including changing notice to move, manning levels and sustainability. 
1F6. Joint Desired Order of Arrival.  The Joint Force Element T able, with force 
elements prioritised, provides the Joint Desired Order of Arrival.  This then allows the 
Defence Supply Chain and Operational Movements Group to plan strategic lift. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1F-2 3rd Edition 
1F7. Assignment of Force Elements.  The Joint T ask Force Commander (JTFC) 
assigns force elements to subordinate tactical or component commanders in 
accordance with his initial Concept of Operations (CONOPS).  4 levels of assignment 
are used: 
a.      Allotment.  Allotment is a temporary change in the assignment of force 
elements between subordinate co
mmanders.  Authority to allot is held by the 
commander with Operational Command (OPCOM), normally the Joint 
Commander. 
b.      Apportionment.  Apportionment is the JTFC’s responsibility.  It 
determines the total expected effort for an operation, activity or area over a 
given time by percentage and priorit
y. 
c.      Allocation.  Allocation is a tactical/comp onent commander’s translation 
of apportionment into specific force elements required, by unit number and 
type. 
d.      Tasking.  Tasking is the process of translating the allocation of force 
elements into orders, and passing them to units. 
1F8. Constructing a Multinational Joint T
ask Force.  PJHQ will convene a troop 
contributing nations’ meeting to
 develop the Joint Statement of Requirement early in 
the planning process.  This establishes a common understanding of the situation and a 
baseline for national planning.  The JTFHQ Chief of Staff (COS) and Deputy COS 
(DCOS) assess potential capabilities and their employment, without constraining the 
JTFC’s freedom of action.  They should, however, avoid promises concerning specific 
roles at this stage.  The task of integrating force elements begins here but will fall 
largely to JTFHQ divisional heads.  Following this meeting national contingent 
commanders may undertake reconnaissance of the Joint Operations Area (JOA). 
Deployment 
1F9. Pre-Deployment Headquarters Training, Validation and Rehearsals.   The 
UK has an established tiered training scheme to maintain joint currency
.  The JTFC 
and staff should also endeavour to make use of operational level training, conducted 
by PJHQ J7.  Where possible, training should involve relevant other government 
departments and agencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1F-3 3rd Edition 
1F10. Mounting the Joint Task Force.  Mounting the JTF involves implementation 
of a detailed deployment plan, based on the finalised Joint Force Element 
Table, Joint 
Desired Order of Arrival, strategic movement instructions and the Load Allocation 
Table.  It is directed and controlled by PJHQ (J3 operations team with J1/J4).  
Mounting activities, involving front line commands and Defence Equipment & 
Support, include: identification and preparation of force elements, their equipment and 
stores; pre-deployment training and briefing; and transportation to the point of 
embarkation. 
1F11. Deployment Flow.  The Detailed Deployment Plan should  enable deployment 
in accordance with the JTFC’s intent.  In practice, however, the complexity of the 
mounting process and competition for early strategic lift will inject the risk of an 
unbalanced, prolonged or interrupted deployment.  It is crucial that force elements 
required in theatre in advance of the main body – for enabling, intelligence and 
shaping activities – arrive sufficiently early.  The deployment requires the constant 
attention of PJHQ, JTFHQ, front line commands and Defence Equipment & Support. 
1F12. Force Projection.  The speed with which a force can deploy will be driven by: 
the composition of the force; th
e availability of UK assets and their proximity to the 
JOA; access to strategic lift; and the availability of appropriate regional air basing to 
shorten lines of communication.  Mutual support between multinational partners will 
also be key. 
1F13. Training and Rehearsals En-Route.  Wh ere possible and appropriate, 
training and rehearsals en-route may be employed to demonstrate intent and shape the 
perceptions of other actors.  This alone may provide sufficient deterrence to achieve 
the desired outcome. 
In-Theatre Preparation 
1F14. Reception, Staging, Onward Movement and Integration.  Reception, 
Staging, Onward Movem
ent and Integration (RSOI) describes the activities that enable 
force elements to attain Full Operating Capability (FOC) once in theatre.  It is a 
national responsibility unless directed otherwise.  During multinational operations, 
national forces may conduct RSOI concurrently, requiring extensive coordination and 
deconfliction. The Reception, Staging and Onward Movement element is usually 
coordinated by the Joint Force Logistic Component Headquarters (JFLogCHQ) and it 
is vital that J4 staff are involved early in reconnaissance and planning.  Integration will 
be conducted both within and across components and is J3 led. 
1F15. Joint Task Force Commander’s Priority List.  The JTF C controls changes to 
the Detailed Deployment Plan by issuing and updating a priority list.  This may adjust 
priorities for arrival of force elements, additional force elements, equipment issues and 
sustainment. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 1F-4 3rd Edition 
1F16. Operating Capability.  The po int at which a JTF achieves Initial Operating 
Capability (IOC) is largely a subjective judgement.  It is, however, useful in 
expressing a halfway-house between initial deployment and FOC.  The declaration of 
IOC is the JTFC’s responsibility and will be pre-defined.  FOC is achieved once all 
force elements are in the JOA, have completed preparation and are ready to commence 
operations.  Some elements may, however, already be engaged. 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-1 3rd Edition 
CHAPTER 2 – COMPONENT CONTRIBUTIONS TO JOINT 
OPERATIONS 
Chapter 2 describes the evolution of componency.  It sets out a traditional component 
and joint force elements model, which retains broad utility in larger scale alliance and 
coalition combat operations, where this construct prevails, but explores the value of 
using more integrated headquarters’ models for national and smaller scale operations. 
    Section I – Componency 
Section II – Maritime Component 
Section III – Land Component 
Section IV – Air Component 
Section V – Special Forces Component 
Section VI – Logistic Component 
Section VII – Joint Force Elements 
SECTION I – COMPONENCY 
Operation PALLISER 
“Components and Joint Force Elements remain a valid approach, but we must remain 
pragmatic and open to ideas about delivering joint capability in other ways (for 
example, at small scale or in coalitions/multinational operations). There is a danger 
that the growth in standing staffs and headquarters, all needing coordination and 
resources, may over-shadow the delivery of the effects and associated force elements.  
A Command and Control (C2) estimate is a necessary element of the planning 
process”.1 
201. Individual single-Service component headquarters evolved post-World W ar 2 
influenced principally by: the large spans of control associated with abundant force 
elements; the rapid development of diverse single-Service operational techniques; and 
– recognising a fundamental truth that is too often ignored – single-Service rivalries.  
The maturity of current UK joint organisations, from education and training 
establishments to operational headquarters and force elements, now enables more 
integrated approaches to operational headquarters design.  This is helped by 
communication technology and accelerated by operational experience.  Commanders 
should also seek closer cooperation with other government departments and agencies 
in order to promote comprehensive approaches to operations.  Moreover, nations 
rarely act in isolation, even where national interests are at stake.  Therefore, 
commanders should consider a joint, multinational and inter-agency approach from the 
outset of headquarters design.  However, not all nations can, or will, develop at the 
                                           
1 Deputy Chief of Joint Operations (Operations) during Joint Force Headquarters Cross-Component Seminar 6/7 
September 2005. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-2 3rd Edition 
same rate and alliance obligations drive the UK to be compatible with different C2 
frameworks.  Therefore, the UK must also operate within a traditional single-Service 
component framework for some multinational operations, but for national and small 
scale operations, an integrated headquarters is the preferred option. 
Multinational Context 
202. This chapter articulates the component model and assumes the UK can, if 
required, take the lead or act as the fram
ework nation.  It is recognised, however, that 
the UK is likely in many (and probably most) circumstances to operate as a 
contributing nation within an alliance or coalition, particularly at the larger scales of 
effort.  Within this latter context, the UK national contingent would deliver only 
discrete force elements, unified under a national contingent commander, but within 
components led by another nation.   
Types of Operation 
203. Major Combat.  The component model has particular utility during lar ge scale 
major combat operations, which employ the full gamut of military capability and 
formation level manoeuvre.  The associated tempo and span of control associated with 
transforming the Joint Task Force Commander’s (JTFC’s) direction into the spectrum 
of tactical activities, as well as contributing to Joint Task Force (JTF) level planning, 
demands the provision of independent, self-sustaining component headquarters.  This 
construct allows the JTFC to remain focused on the operational level. 
204. Security, Stabilisation and Peace Support.  Security, stabilisation and peace 
support may also involve comb
at and security activities to support the process of 
stabilisation, as well as enduring peacekeeping and periodic peacetime military 
engagement.  They will not, however, mirror the intensity and scale of manoeuvre 
envisaged within major combat.  Though complex in their own right, the enduring 
nature and reduced tempo of such operations might negate the need for an additional 
tier of C2, favouring instead a fully integrated Joint Task Force Headquarters 
(JTFHQ), to which force elements work directly.  This would also better enable the 
integration of the many other agencies that characterise such operations.  Indeed, when 
high tempo is required, additional layers of command might act as an obstacle to it, 
increasing the breadth of the JTFHQ’s task and in turn the headquarters’ size.  
Conversely, smaller C2 footprints reduce deployment overheads and minimise the 
drain on scarce equipment, particularly communications, and manpower. 
205. Environmental Focus.  A campaign with an environmental bias further 
supports t
he concept of an integrated JTFHQ.  Within a counter-insurgency context, 
for example, where physical presence is important, it is likely that the land 
environment will have the lead.  In such a situation, an integrated JTFHQ, with 
rationalised maritime, air, Special Forces (SF) and logistic headquarters elements, 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-3 3rd Edition 
exercising direct C2 of fully synchronised force elements, should bring resource 
efficiencies and, more importantly, generate greater tempo than discrete component 
headquarters operating in traditional supported or supporting roles.  Indeed, the 
JTFHQ might be formed from the senior land formation headquarters, with 
augmentation from the Joint Force Headquarters (JFHQ) and other front line 
commands.  This principle applies equally to a campaign with a maritime, air, logistic 
or SF focus. 
Scales of Effort 
‘The UK Approach to Componency – An Audit of National Operational 
Architecture and Best Practice’ 
“Common practice for constructing a JTF has been to deliver additional and bespoke 
battle staffs and component headquarters to form an operational interface with the 
JTFHQ.  At small scale, and just above, this assumption produces high deployment 
overheads, reduces agility and is certainly not consistent with streamlining our force 
ratios or deployment footprint.” 
“I see no reason why at small scale operations or above we cannot embed rationalised 
(environmental) component headquarters in a JTFHQ deployable infrastructure…As 
we migrate to medium scale operations it would be interesting to determine at what 
point the independent deployment of component headquarters delivered an effects 
efficiency.” 
Brigadier D A Capewell – October 2004 
 
206. Maturing of the component model has seen a concomitant growth in the size 
and comp
lexity of associated headquarters.  However, the deployment of larger 
headquarters comes at a penalty to tempo and coherence, and it stretches the coupling 
bridge.  At lower scales of effort, (small to medium) therefore, where environmental or 
functional contributions might be a single formation or even unit, an integrated 
JTFHQ, exercising direct C2 of force elements, is more efficient and effective.  This is 
particularly true within a small scale very high readiness scenario – characterised by 
high tempo and agility with a light footprint and limited duration – which demands a 
small, agile staff with a minimum of C2 layers between commander and task unit.  But 
any architecture deployed must have the flexibility to adapt to the component model as 
the campaign and its scale of effort develops over time.  An integrated JTFHQ might 
be formed by a standing or bespoke operational level headquarters augmented by 
rationalised headquarters elements from front line commands, Director Special Forces 
or by augmentation of the most appropriate tactical environmental headquarters.  The 
C2 estimate should influence the size and shape of all headquarters elements, 
including the JTFHQ. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-4 3rd Edition 
Componency Model 
207. While C2 of specialist or scarce joint force elements could be retained at  the 
operational level, wider environmental capabilities may be brigaded into components 
under the JTFC’s unifying command.  The 5 components that may be established by 
the UK are the Joint Force Maritime, Land, Air, SF and Logistic Components (JFMC, 
JFLC, JFAC, JFSFC and JFLogC respectively).  The context and environmental focus 
of the operation will shape the size and structure of each, which may require 
adjustment as the campaign develops.  While force elements within each component 
will predominately reflect its environmental focus, components are likely to exchange 
capabilities, on either a permanent or a temporary basis, in order to maintain agility.   
Component Command and Control 
208. Selection and Generation.  A designated commander and his headquarters 
exercises C2 of each com
ponent.  Front line commands in consultation with the Joint 
Commander (usually Chief of Joint Operations (CJO)) normally nominate 
environmental component commanders.  Director Special Forces nominates the 
JFSFCC, while the JFLogCC is normally the Standing JFLogCC.  The headquarters’ 
role may be fulfilled by a standing component headquarters, a bespoke headquarters 
generated for the operation, or by the senior deployed environmental formation 
headquarters. 
209. Responsibilities.  The responsibilities of a component commander and his 
staf
f span both the operational and tactical levels.  Balancing the conflicting demands 
of each level will be a significant challenge: 
a.      Tactical Level.  The component commander’s principal focus will be 
the tactical C2 of his com
ponent and the decentralised planning and 
execution of the activities required of it, in order to deliver the JTFC’s 
supporting effects.  This may demand the integration of joint capabilities 
assigned from the operational level.  The component commander must 
translate the JTFC’s direction into executable orders for his subordinate 
elements, then conduct detailed sequencing and coordination once execution 
is underway.  Supporting effects may be achieved through the activities of 
multiple components.  At the same time, each activity may see a component 
commander in either a supported or supporting role.  As such, constant 
consultation, coordination and liaison between components is vital.  Further 
detail can be found within Chapter 3. 
b.      Operational Level.  The JTFC and his staff have responsibility for 
campaign planning and execution.  They provi
de direction to component 
commanders, in the form of a campaign plan, Operation Plans (OPLANs) and, 
ultimately, specific Operation Orders (OPORDs), which clearly articulate the 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-5 3rd Edition 
JTFC’s intent and component missions.  The complex relationships between 
activities, the requirement for components to exchange capability and the 
competition for limited resources needs to be orchestrated at the operational 
level, prior to and during execution.  Component commanders should, 
however, be intimately involved at all stages of the planning process, 
providing specialist input and advice.  They should shape planning to 
maximise the effectiveness of component capabilities, and thus the Joint Task 
Force (JTF) as a whole.  Equally, during execution they will be pivotal to the 
coordination, synchronisation and assessment of activities and effects. 
Supported and Supporting Command Relationships 
210. The principal way in which a JTFC expresses the requirement for cross-
com
ponent coordination is by designating component commanders as either supported 
or supporting.  This does not abrogate responsibility, but defines the underlying basis 
of inter-component relationships.  Supported and supporting relationships may change 
during an operation.  A component commander may be both supporting and supported 
on different lines of operation. 
211. Supported Commander.  A supported com ponent commander ‘has primary 
responsibility for all aspects of a task assigned by higher authority’2 and details the 
support required from the supporting component commanders, through the JTFC.   
212. Supporting Commander.  A supporting com ponent commander advises the 
supported component commander on the optimum employment of his assets then 
delivers capability or support to him, prioritising tasks as required.  The supporting 
component commander may develop a discrete supporting plan but will invariably 
direct the specific activities of his component elements.  
Integration of Components into the Joint Task Force 
213. Integration of components should start prior to the operation.  It demands 
thorough joint (and possibly multinational/
multi-agency) preparation and training to 
develop mutual trust and understanding, and instil unity of effort.  Successful 
operations are invariably characterised by constant liaison and effective 
communications.  Training and liaison are inter-related; neither is fully effective alone.  
Both will also compete for scarce time and resources; the Joint Commander and JTFC 
should ensure that those of the JTF are afforded due priority. 
214. Location of the Component Commanders.  The JTFC should allow each 
component commander appropriate access to him
, without national or service bias.  
While robust communications can mitigate the disadvantages of physical separation, 
they cannot entirely replace the benefits of regular personal contact, which the 
                                           
2 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1 UK Glossary of Joint and Multinational Terms and Definitions. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-6 3rd Edition 
collocation of component commanders and the JTFC brings.  For some component 
commanders this may, however, prejudice their ability to exercise effective tactical 
command, demanding that a balance be struck between the benefits of collocation with 
the JTFC and proximity to component elements.  For the full Joint Force Air 
Component Commander (JFACC) and Joint Force Special Forces Component 
Commander (JFSFCC), the balance favours collocation with the JTFC.  For the Joint 
Force Maritime Component Commander (JFMCC), Joint Force Land Component 
Commander (JFLCC) and JFLogCC it is less clear-cut; the judgement depends 
entirely upon the circumstances.   
215. Component Representation in the Joint Ta sk Force Headquarters.   Each 
component commander should have an empowered and competent representative 
within the JTFHQ.  If the loss of expertise does not hurt the losing headquarters, it is 
probably the wrong person for the role.  Component commanders may also need 
specialists to represent them at boards, meetings and other coordination mechanisms 
within the JTFHQ’s campaign rhythm. 
216. Liaison between Components.  Liaison between components, as well as with 
the JTFHQ, is essential.  Inter-
Component Coordination and Liaison Teams ensure 
that critical information is rapidly assessed and disseminated across the JTF.  Some 
may play a fully integrated role within their host-component headquarters but they 
remain responsible to the donor component commander.  The employment of high 
quality individuals as liaison officers is critical to component integration.  The 
construct for inter-component coordination and liaison is at Annex 2A. 
Joint and Combined Training 
217. If an operation is to be enduring, senior commanders should consider major 
restructuring at the earliest possible stage in order to institutionalise all aspects of 
education, training, equipment procurement, pre-deployment preparation and – 
crucially – the ability to hunt out lessons and action them
 in order to adapt the force 
quickly in contact.  This may involve significant investment in home-based as well as 
deployed infrastructure. 
Operational Training and Advisory Group 
When the first units deployed to Northern Ireland (NI) on Operation BANNER in 
1968 they did so without any form of pre-deployment training.  It was not until 1972 
that the Northern Ireland Training and Advisory Team (NITAT) was established to 
prepare units for this specific theatre.  Following the example of the ‘Bullrings’ in 
1916, established to deal with the constant flow of units deploying to the Western 
Front, and the Jungle Warfare School, which prepared those deploying to Malaya in 
1948, NITAT was highly successful.  With the advent of the crisis in the Balkans the 
NITAT model provided the basis for the development of Operational Training and  
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-7 3rd Edition 
Advisory Group (OPTAG), which sought to deliver theatre specific pre-deployment 
training for all units across all theatres.  Initially, focused on NI (counter-insurgency) 
and the Balkans (peacekeeping/enforcement) missions, OPTAG’s remit has grown to 
meet the breadth and complexity of UK deployments on enduring operations, 
demanding ever increasing resources cross the spectrum of time, manpower and 
equipment. 
218. The UK has a standing joint training regime, designed to develop and practise 
both JTFCs and JTFHQs, as well as component commanders and their staffs, by 
providing:
 
a.      Individual and collective joint training, and readiness assessment.  
b.      A tiered approach to JTF and component collective training, which will 
include the participation of other government departments and agencies where 
possible: 
(1)    Tier 1.  Tactical level training, m anaged by front line commands, 
of force elements to operate as part of their respective components. 
(2)    Tier 2.  Training of components to operate as part of a JTF; Tier 2 
training is focused on improving component interoperability.  Front line 
commands/Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) arrange Tier 2 
training. 
(3)    Tier 3.  Operational level training for a JTF to conduct 
national/multinational operations under the auspices of the CJO. 
(4)    Tier 4.  Higher level training involving multinational partners 
and, where practicab
le, other agencies. 
c.      A planning capability developed to include situational understanding, 
mission analysis, evaluation of objects and factors, course of action 
development and iterative planning supported by assessment. 
d.      A training and validation capability to deliver JTFCs/com
ponent 
commanders at very short notice, which is interoperable with North Atlantic 
Treaty Organisation (NATO), other m
ultinational partners, the Defence Crisis 
Management Organisation (DCMO) and other government departments. 
National Contingent Command 
219. Where the UK is not acting as a lead or framework nation, but is instead 
providing a force contribution to an alliance or coalition, the UK should be represented 
at the operational and tactical levels.  In this case, the framework headquarters may be 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-8 3rd Edition 
deployed as a national contingent headquarters, with an embedded national contingent 
commander. 
220. Responsibilities of a National Contingent Commander.  The principal role 
of a national contingent commander is to integrate national elements into a 
mu
ltinational force, advising on capabilities and constraints.  This will ensure that 
component commanders are not distracted from tactical missions.  Specific national 
contingent commander tasks include: 
a.      Exercising, under strategic direction, national command of forces.  The 
national contingent commander may wo
rk directly to PJHQ, or through a 
national joint contingent commander. 
b.      Informing national strategic authorities of the current situation, future 
plans, and developments, which may affect national objectives, require 
changes in rules of engagement or co
mmitment of additional resources.   
c.      Recommending changes to national command arrangements under 
which forces are assigned or attached to a multinational com
ponent. 
d.      Influencing planning and execution in accordance with national 
objectives, through a personal relationship with the JTFC and staff engagem
ent 
at lower levels. 
e.      Conducting longer-term force planning, to ensure integration into 
component plans and that national re
sources are in place when required. 
f.      Harmonising Communications and Information Systems (CIS) and 
integrating intelligence architecture 
SECTION II – MARITIME COMPONENT 
221. The JFMC provides a broad, agile and scalable capability, which can op erate 
within all environments from the open ocean to the littoral, and across benign to 
combat conditions.  It can also enable the delivery or integration of JFLC and JFSFC 
assets and staging of air operations.  It is capable of contributing to political and 
economic, as well as military, objectives.  BR1806 British Maritime Doctrine provides 
detailed guidance on the employment of maritime power.3 
                                           
3 This is developed in AJP-3.1 Allied Joint Maritime Operations and supported by BR 4487(1) Fighting Instructions 
Volume I – The Maritime Commander’s Handbook. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-9 3rd Edition 
Characteristics 
222. The enduring characteristics of maritime forces – access, mobility , versatility, 
sustained reach, resilience, lift capacity, poise and leverage – bring utility across a 
broad range of operations, which may be engaged in simultaneously or consecutively.  
These operations are grouped under the 3 general categories of military, constabulary 
and benign,4 and can be conducted at a scale that ranges from individual units to 
carrier and littoral manoeuvre task groups. 
223. Identification of a Crisis.  Maritime forces operating in international waters 
can provide a valuable surveillance asset from the outset of a crisis.  Intelligence 
gathering may focus initially at the strategic level be
fore transitioning to the 
operational and tactical as the campaign develops. 
224. Sea Control.  Sea control (and denial) brings the JTFC dif fering levels of 
freedom of action; allowing him to exploit JTF capabilities, while protecting its 
combat power. 
a.      Blockade, Containment and Area and Barrier Operations.  Sea 
control may involve blockade of enem
y ports, the containment of surface and 
subsurface forces, or both.5  Area and barrier operations might also be possible 
in certain straits, approaches, convoy assembly or dispersal areas, as well as 
areas selected for amphibious operations or theatre entry. 
b.      Sea Lines of Communication Protection.  Sea control operations may 
provi
de protection to reinforcement and resupply shipping.  This may be 
conducted as a discrete operation involving the escort or screening of 
important units or even full convoying.  Particular emphasis should be placed 
on straits and other choke points but such operations could involve significant 
resources across extended distances. 
225. Force Protection.  Multi-role JFMC assets can contribute to the protection of 
the JTF.  
Assets may be employed individually or collectively to create a mobile area 
of control.  Force protection is achieved through anti-air warfare, anti-surface warfare, 
anti-submarine warfare and mine countermeasure disciplines. 
226. Force Projection.  The JFMC is able to pr oject a force ashore in order to 
conduct the full range of activities – non-combatant evacuation operations, 
amphibious operations, maritime air support, as well as surface and sub-surface land 
                                           
4 Military application is one in which combat is used or threatened or which presupposes a combat capability; 
Constabulary application is where forces are employed to enforce law or to implement a regime established by 
international mandate; Benign involves tasks in which violence has no part to play in their execution.  BR1806 Chapter 4. 
5 The early and covert deployment of Tomahawk Land Attack Missile armed SSNs can also pose a threat to valued land 
targets. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-10 3rd Edition 
attack, for example.  Force projection demands a robust C2 system and detailed 
coordination between components and across environmental seams. 
227. Sustainment.  Once the focus of an operation moves ashore, the JFMC ef fort 
may shift from enabling to supporting.  In addition to enhancing land manoeuvre 
through the application of force, tasks are likely to involve force protection, protecting 
sea lines of communication and logistic support to forces ashore and afloat through sea 
basing, possibly as an alternative to host-nation support. 
228. Campaign Termination, Recovery and Redeployment.  The ability to poise 
offshore provides a sea base with secure, capable co
mmunications to support C2, as 
well as the protection of logistic assets (including medical) necessary during 
overwatch or withdrawal. 
229. Maritime Trade Operations.  Merchant shipping activity will demand close 
coordination between national military
, commercial and government organisations in 
order to meet the operational need, while maintaining safety.  Maritime trade 
operations incorporate measures including naval cooperation and guidance for 
shipping and the protection of merchant ships, as well as their world-wide movement 
and harbour operations where the UK has an interest.  Maritime trade operations 
should be included in all aspects of planning where merchant ships may affect, or be 
affected by, operations.  It is effected through a 4-tier graduated response from the 
onset of crisis.  This process is supported by constant peacetime dialogue. 
Contribution to Joint Operations 
230. Fire Support.  A maritim e task group can deliver fires using carrier-based 
aircraft, long range precision attack missiles and medium range gun munitions.  As 
well as engaging targets, it can also integrate fire support and conduct battle damage 
assessment using aircraft.   
231. Force Protection.  A carrier strike task group, formed around an aircraft 
carrier
, can provide limited air defence (both offensive and defensive counter-air) and 
protection to ground forces through close air support and air interdiction.  A landing 
platform helicopter, with a tailored air group, or other craft are also capable of 
recovering personnel if required. 
232. Mobility.  A maritime task group may be the principal me ans of initial 
deployment for an intervention force.  It can project significant forces and materiel 
over 400 miles in 24 hours then provide sea basing thus minimising risk to land forces, 
generating tempo and maximising surprise. 
233. Amphibious Operations.  An amphibious task group is focused on the 
projection of am
phibious forces ashore, normally in conjunction with a carrier strike 
task group.   The 4 principal types of amphibious operation are: demonstration, raid, 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-11 3rd Edition 
assault and withdrawal.  The need for detailed coordination across all environments 
makes amphibious operations extremely complex. 
234. Support by Organic Air.  Aircraft from a carrier strike task group will 
contribute to counter
-air, anti-surface force and combat support air operations in 
conjunction with land-based aircraft, when available.  Maritime air operations should 
be integrated across the force and coordinated and synchronised by the JFACC.   
235. Surface and Sub-Surface Land Attack.  Surface and sub-surface land attack 
m
issiles may provide the primary means of organic long range attack, especially in the 
early stages of an operation, and have particular utility for coercion.  They will 
subsequently complement other air interdiction forces.  Naval fire support may also 
conduct advanced bombardment, then complement land artillery once deployed and is 
available to any ground unit operating in the littoral. 
Command and Control 
236. The JFMCC has a planning function within the JTFHQ that provides input to 
the campaign plan, but exercises command
 at the tactical level. 
237. Selection of the Maritime Component Headquarters.  The Joint Force 
Maritime
 Component Headquarters (JFMCHQ) is formed from the standing staffs of 
either Commander UK Maritime Forces or Commander UK Amphibious Forces.  
They are supported by four 1* commanders: Commander UK Task Group; 
Commander Carrier Strike Group; Commander Amphibious Task Group; and 
Commander 3 Commando Brigade Royal Marines.  The exact construct of the 
deployed headquarters will be determined by the nature and scale of the operation. 
238. Location of the Maritime Component Headquarters.  While it may appear 
logical for the JFMCC to be afloat, the tempo of planning and execution, combined 
with the requirem
ent for robust digital communications, may support his collocation 
with the JTFHQ or other component headquarters.  The location ultimately selected 
for the JFMCC and his staff will be driven by operational imperatives.  When afloat, a 
suitably configured platform cannot only meet all the JFMCC’s planning and 
execution needs, particularly robust communications, but also provide high levels of 
force protection. 
239. Command and Control of Amphibious Forces.  The C2 of amphibious 
operations is detailed
 in either the Joint Commander’s Mission Directive (see JDP 5-
00 Campaign Planning, Annex 2C) or the JTFC’s Campaign Directive (see JDP 5-00, 
Annex 3F).  These directives specify the command relationships between the 
Commander Amphibious Task Force, the Commander Landing Force and other 
component commanders involved.  It also states the command relationships which will 
apply on termination of the amphibious operation.  Conventionally, Commander 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-12 3rd Edition 
Amphibious Task Force and Commander Landing Force are under the Operational 
Control (OPCON) of the JFMCC, although Commander Amphibious Task Force may 
also be the JFMCC when the sole, or primary, maritime operation is an amphibious 
one.  The Commander Amphibious Task Force may, however, act under direct 
OPCON of the JTFC when it is impractical for the JFMCC to exercise OPCON of the 
Amphibious Task Force.  In this case, C2 arrangements between the Commander 
Amphibious Task Force and other component commanders must be clearly defined to 
ensure effective cross-component coordination and synchronisation. 
240. Task Organisation.  Maritime forces are grouped functionally for operations 
into a task organisati
on consisting of a maximum of 4 levels: task forces, task groups, 
task units and task elements.  The use of these levels is flexible and bears no direct 
relationship to levels of command or planning. 
241. Multinational Operations.  Ta sk organisation and widespread adherence to 
standardised tactical procedures amongst Allied navies, permits integration of 
multinational maritime forces as low as unit level.  Standing naval forces, such as the 
standing NATO maritime groups, may provide the nucleus of a larger multinational 
naval expanded task force.  Other bilateral arrangements, such as the UK/Netherlands 
Amphibious Force, also provide alternative standing multinational maritime forces. 
SECTION III – LAND COMPONENT 
242. Land forces are required to engage decisively at close quarters with 
conventional or irregular adve
rsaries, operating close to, or amongst, the population.  
At the same time they need to interact at first hand with a multitude of other actors to 
deliver both physical and psychological effects.  The intimacy of this environment 
presents a distinctive level of complexity and friction.  This demands not only 
technical skill but also considerable initiative, resilience, cultural awareness and 
sensitivity at every level.  The UK doctrinal authority for land operations is Army 
Doctrine Publication (ADP) Land Operations.6 
243. Land forces must be balanced and agile, enabling them to undertake the full 
range of activities within hostile to benign environments, as well as transition rapidly 
between them.  However
, a combat ethos defines land forces.  The complexity, 
uncertainty and stress - mental and physical - of this endeavour presents the greatest 
military challenge.  Only through preparedness for its demands can the full range of 
military tasks be undertaken. 
                                           
6 ADP Land Ops is currently under review and will be promulgated in 2010.   
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-13 3rd Edition 
Characteristics 
244. Core Functions.  The JFLC uses the core functions of Find, Fix, Strike and 
Exploit, within the framework of operations to visualise operations and allocate 
purpose.  These may be consecutive or simultaneous, and apply across the full range 
of operational activities.  Finding endures throughout and spans locating, identifying 
and assessing an opponent.  Fixing is to deny an opponent his goals, or to distract him 
and thus deprive him of his freedom of action, while ensuring one’s own.  Striking 
involves having the freedom of action to manoeuvre into a position of advantage from 
which force can be threatened or applied.  Exploitation is the seizure of opportunity in 
order to realise an aspect of the commander’s intent. 
245. Combined Arms Groupings.  Land forces must be structured, equipped, 
trained and prepared to provi
de, on an independent or integrated basis, formations 
capable of tactical manoeuvre.  They must have the combat power to defeat or destroy 
an adversary, while maintaining the flexibility to adapt to a broader range of activities.  
As such the prosecution of land operations is characterised by its combined arms 
nature: a mix of combat forces (such as infantry or armour), combat support forces 
(such as artillery or engineers) and combat service support forces (such as logistic or 
medical).  This is then structured within a hierarchical C2 framework enabled by CIS.  
The JFLC is normally task organised, with combat, combat support and combat 
service support assets allocated accordingly. 
246. Divisional Level.  For independent operation within a deliberate intervention 
context, the ideal level of co
mbined arms capability is considered as the Division, 
within and supported by a Corps framework.  Its range of capabilities and span of C2 
enables the Division to tackle the simultaneity and tempo of operations, orchestrating 
activities in concurrent tactical engagements.  Moreover, it provides the resilience and 
versatility to tackle, either simultaneously or sequentially, an array of other activities.  
At lower scales of effort a brigade may deploy under a 2* headquarters or battlegroup 
under a 1* headquarters. 
Contribution to Joint Operations 
247. Land forces provide a unique capability to conduct close combat and dominate 
ground, which will be essential to the defeat of an intractable opponent.  The 
additional capacity to seize and secure terrain, establish and maintain human contact 
with civilian populations, enable and work with civilian agencies and contribute to 
deterrence ef
fect, will also provide crucial depth and breadth to a JTF. 
248. The deployment of military forces is a clear demonstration of political intent.  
The most striki
ng impact upon an adversary, as well as the indigenous population and 
its leadership, will, however, be achieved by the physical presence of forces in the land 
environment. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-14 3rd Edition 
249. The land contribution to operations consists principally of 3 types of forces: 
a.      Reconnaissance Forces.  Reconnaissance forces act as either combat or 
com
bat support elements.  Their primary purpose is to gain information. 
b.      Ground Manoeuvre Forces.  Ground manoeuvre is the coordination of 
ground forces that enables a land commander to conduct activity in support of 
the JTFC’s campaign.  It is supported by 3 types of force, heavy, m
edium and 
light, which will usually operate in combination. 
c.      Air Manoeuvre Forces.  Air manoeuvre forces exploit the mobility of 
aircraft to provide reach and agility.  They include: attack, support and 
reconnaissance helicopters; air assault and airborne infantry; a
nd combat 
support and combat service support elements.  Their operations should be 
closely integrated with close air support, air interdiction and other strike or 
reconnaissance aircraft. 
Command and Control 
250. C2 of land forces will be situation dependent.  The land commander mu st have 
the experience and authority to not only influence the employment of land forces 
through the operational planning process and direct interaction with the JTFC and 
other component commanders, but also command land forces at the tactical level.  
Inherent tension will exist between these conflicting responsibilities. 
251. Selection of the Land Component Headquarters.  The sel ection, structure 
and size of a JFLCHQ will again be situation dependent and may vary considerably.  
The tempo and agility required of a land headquarters, for major combat in particular, 
may demand that a separate JFLCHQ be designated above a formation headquarters.  
At lower scales of effort and tempo, a headquarters may be capable of exercising all 
aspects of command of land forces.  A JFLCHQ is normally formed around a standing 
formation headquarters: 
a.      The Allied Rapid Reaction Corps.  Headquarters Allied Rapid 
Reaction Corps (ARRC) became the focus for national land componency 
issues in Novem
ber 2004.  It has significant practical experience and 
comprehensive Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for the role of JFLC on 
a NATO operation. 
b.      The Division.  Deployable divisions are capable of land component and 
national land contingent command.  Of th
ese, component command is the 
lowest priority for both training and readiness.  Divisional SOPs and 
standardisation have gone some way to addressing headquarters structures. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-15 3rd Edition 
c.      The Brigade and Battlegroup.  Both Joint Rapid Reaction Force 
brigades (16 Air Assault Brigade and 3 Commando Brigade) are capable of 
commanding a JFLC during short notice, expeditionary intervention 
operations.  Indeed, ongoing development seeks to increase the capacity for 
independent action by brigades within a joint context.  Though technically 
possible, it is highly unlikely that a battlegroup would fulfil this role in an 
operational environm
ent. 
252. Location of the Land Component Headquarters.  The JFLCHQ is likely to 
be geographically separated from the JTFC and reliant on embedded environm
ental 
experts.  The choice of the JFLCC’s senior representative at the JTFHQ, in whom he 
must have complete confidence, is a critical issue. 
253. Responsibilities.  The JFLC will be required to operate intimately with other 
com
ponents and interact with a variety of external actors across its area of 
responsibility.  Should the JTFHQ not be deployed in theatre, many of its liaison and 
staff functions may also be subsumed by the JFLCHQ.  In such circumstances the 
headquarters would require augmentation. 
254. Multinational Operations.  JFLCs do not generally mix national 
contributions below brigade level.  Greater mu
ltinationality is acceptable where: a 
high degree of interoperability or confidence pre-exists, such as with NATO Response 
Forces; niche capabilities are being provided; or the assessed threat level or mission 
complexity is low. 
SECTION IV – AIR COMPONENT 
255. In conventional military operations, all-weather precision air attack can 
decisively shape the battlespace.  However, despite advances in sensor technology and 
im
provements in C2 for time sensitive targeting, the majority of air systems are not 
optimised to find, track and engage well hidden and fleeting targets in urban areas and 
amongst wider populations.  Therefore, while air power has immense utility for 
conventional combat operations, the use of air attack in complex terrain must be fully 
integrated with surface forces to be most effective.  AP3000 British Air and Space 
Power Doctrine (4th Edition) provides detailed guidance on the employment of air 
power. 
Characteristics 
256. Air power is characterised by its speed, reach and height, which allow 
ubiquity
 – the ability to range almost everywhere within and beyond the Area of 
Operations – and agility - the ability to respond quickly and provide early deterrence.  
Height continuity and modern sensors also provide a distinct perspective and a major 
contribution to situational awareness.  In combination, these provide the JTFC a means 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-16 3rd Edition 
of independently and rapidly influencing a wide variety of actors, even prior to 
deployment of the main force. 
257. Air power has limitations.  Technology is, however, increasingly overcoming 
we
ather conditions and fragility, while air-to-air refuelling and unmanned aerial 
vehicles are enabling air power to partially surmount impermanence.  Airlift also has 
a limited payload compared with surface means but speed and reach offset this.  In 
addition, air power needs intensive training and coordination to be effective in 
complex terrain.  Finally, air assets should be employed concurrently rather than 
sequentially for concentration of force and not generally held in reserve due to limited 
aircraft numbers.  That said, sortie rates can periodically be surged. 
Contribution to Joint Operations 
258. There are 4 fundamental air power roles.  Control of the air enables freedom  
of air and surface manoeuvre and, therefore, the ability to retain initiative.  Air control 
is a vital pre-requisite for joint operations, but is rarely absolute; adversaries 
frequently contest the lower airspace with hand held missiles and small arms.  Air 
mobility and lift enable global, regional and local deployment of personnel and 
materiel.  Mobility and lift are also fundamental enablers of surface manoeuvre, with 
particular utility for light and special forces.  Situational awareness reflects an ever-
increasing emphasis on the find function, but there are limitations to what air and 
space systems can locate.  However, air power contributes significantly and, with 
current surveillance and reconnaissance systems, can provide a virtually ‘unblinking 
eye’ as the first step to promoting situational understanding.  Precision attack at range 
is one of air power’s key strengths, which can be employed at the strategic, operational 
or tactical levels.  It can engage a range of mobile and static targets across multiple 
theatres of operation.  One of precision attack’s greatest strengths is its ability to 
coerce an adversary by holding him at continuous risk.  Air power’s reputation for 
precision attack can also be exploited for significant psychological effect through the 
show of force or strength. 
259. Air power can transition rapidly between a range of defensive and offensiv e 
operations that extend from its 4 fundamental roles.  Strategic air operations are an 
extension of precision attack that can disrupt or destroy vital target sets.  They have 
most utility in conventional state-on-state or force-on-force operations.  Counter-air 
operations achieve an appropriate level of air control, through the destruction, 
degradation or disruption of enemy defensive systems, in order to provide freedom of 
air and surface manoeuvre.  Counter-space operations on the other hand attain and 
maintain control of space, enabling the exploitation of friendly capabilities, while 
negating those of an adversary.  Counter-land operations shape the battlespace 
through the targeting of ground forces and their infrastructure, while counter-sea 
operations exploit sea surveillance and reconnaissance, anti-surface warfare, anti-
submarine warfare and mine countermeasures. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-17 3rd Edition 
260. Airlift operations move and sustain forces while air  logistics operations 
deploy, sustain, distribute and recover personnel, equipment, supplies and extract non-
combatants.  Airborne operations deliver ground combat power to seize ground or 
installations through the airdrop or air landing of land forces.  Aeromedical 
evacuation transports ill or injured personnel under medical supervision to appropriate 
medical treatment facilities and personnel recovery operations recover personnel 
from hostile environments.  Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and 
Reconnaissance (ISTAR) operations support planning, execution and situational 
understanding for joint operations and special air operations use modified equipment 
and training in unconventional applications against strategic and operational 
objectives.  Electronic warfare operations gain and maintain control of the 
electromagnetic spectrum.  Air-to-air refuelling operations increase the range, 
endurance, payload and flexibility of other aircraft.  Air traffic control operations 
guide, control and support civil and military air traffic within the framework of the 
Airspace Control Order.  Position, navigation and timing from space based systems 
provides accurate location and time references to support operations.  Geospacial 
support operations produce high quality material, including geographic and 
meteorological data, to support mission planning, execution and situational 
understanding. 
261. Space.  Even relatively unsophisticated opponents can exploit space-based 
assets, on which the m
ilitary is increasingly dependent.  Satellite communications are 
the bearer for Global Positioning System position, navigation and timing.  They also 
provide a significant ISTAR contribution.  Although tasking of space assets is 
controlled at the strategic level, the JTFC may have access to their products.  The 
JFACC is the focus for space operations. 
Command and Control 
262. Air assets are expensive, relatively small in numbers and need significant lead 
time for planning in order to integrate indivi
dual missions effectively.  This drives the 
principles of planning and execution: 
a.      Unity of Command.  Command at the highest practicable level allows 
the optimum
 balance of priorities to be established. 
b.      Centralised Planning.  Centralised planning ensures efficient and 
effective integration of all activ
ities.  However, air planning teams can usefully 
be embedded at any level of command – and should be – where the integration 
requirements are stringent and the tempo of air-surface operations high. 
c.      Centralised Control.  Centralised control invests the responsibility and 
authority for planning air operations in a single headquarters, which 
orchestrates all activities.  However,
 where operations are widely dispersed, 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-18 3rd Edition 
potentially across multiple theatres, and different in character from event to 
event, the JFACC should delegate resources and control to the lowest practical 
level.  Some low density/high value assets will, however, be so scarce that they 
must always be centrally controlled. 
d.      Decentralised Execution.  Responsibility  for execution is delegated to 
subordinate commanders to encourage maximum initiative through mission 
command. 
263. The JFACC’s rank may vary from 3* to OF-5.  The JTFC will norm ally 
delegate to him responsibility for all air operations within the Area of Operations as 
the Airspace Control Authority.  The JFACC will be required to balance, coordinate 
and synchronise the air effort at the operational level, as well as command the tactical 
activities of assigned assets.  He may also be appointed Area Air Defence Commander. 
264. Selection of the Air Component Headquarters.  The St anding JFACHQ, 
provides support to the JFACC and core of the deployable headquarters. 
265. Location of the Air Component Headquarters.  The JFACC may exercise 
co
mmand afloat, ashore in a rear area, forward in theatre, or airborne in a suitably 
configured aircraft.  Location will be situation dependent.  There are, however, 
considerable advantages to collocation with the JTFC.  Moreover, air-land integration 
is enhanced by the collocation of the JFACC and JFLCC. 
266. Functions of the Air Component Headquarters.  The primary role of th e 
JFACHQ is to support the JFACC in the prosecution of air operations across 3 areas. 
a.      Support to Air Operations.  Support to air operations involves the 
planning, tasking and supervisi
on of joint air operations. 
b.      Battlespace Management.  Battlespace management involves: the 
implementa
tion of airspace coordination measures; air defence C2; electronic 
warfare and electromagnetic spectrum management; military use of space; and 
data link management, while contributing to the coordination of ISTAR 
activities and fires. 
c.      Support to the Air Component.  Support to the JFAC encompasses all 
aspects of component planning and execution. 
267. The Air 
Planning Cycle.  In consultation with the JTFC and other component 
commanders, the JF
ACC produces the Joint Air Operations Plan.  This is implemented 
through the Airspace Control Order and Air Tasking Order.  The cycle may be from 48 
to 72 hours, but can accommodate amendments at any stage, including airborne re-
tasking.  The Air Tasking Order captures all air activity down to the lower tactical 
level, detailing units, tasks and targets.  It must reflect the Joint Air Operations Plan, 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-19 3rd Edition 
but is also shaped by the current situation, additional JTFC guidance and the 
immediate needs of components.  The Joint Coordination Board and joint effects 
meetings ensure that air operations continue to meet the JTFC’s intent.  
268. Task Organisation.  Flying squadrons are normally brigaded into wings, 
which are tasked directly through the 
Air Tasking Order.  The changing operational 
situation may demand reorganisation and reconfiguration of assets for each cycle.  It is 
not uncommon for individual aircraft to be tasked through the Air Tasking Order. 
269. Multinational Operations.  The air environment has established lar gely 
common international C2 procedures, although tasking cycles can be longer, typically 
up to 96 hours.  Commonality is reinforced by the use of English as the accepted 
language of the air.  In addition, common training, doctrine, tactics and procedures 
assist integration. 
SECTION V – SPECIAL FORCES COMPONENT 
270. The UK doctrinal authority for SF is JDP 3-05 Special Forces Operations. 
Characteristics 
271. SF have utility across the full range of operations and environments.  As a 
limited resource, they shoul
d be focused on objectives with strategic or operational 
impact.7  At the strategic level they may decisively engage targets, in order to affect an 
opponent’s will, understanding or capability, and thus his long term military 
effectiveness.  At the operational level SF action should support the JTFC’s main 
effort.  It might be decisive in its own right or allow exploitation by other elements. 
272. The specialist selection, training, equipment and organisation of SF brin gs the 
capacity to operate in hostile territory, often isolated from the main force.  The JFSFC 
also has greater agility than other components; it can respond rapidly to deliver precise 
action with extended reach and endurance.  SF operations are complex and 
potentially high risk, yet can offer disproportionate gains. 
Contribution to Joint Operations 
273. SF have 3 main functions, which can be used in isolation or to comp lement 
one another: 
a.      Surveillance and Reconnaissance.  SF conduct covert ISTAR by land 
or sea in a static or mobile role and can provide timely information to 
co
mmanders at all levels.  In addition, they may contribute to the general 
                                           
7 The considerations for the employment of SF are: employed for strategic effect, commanded at the highest appropriate 
level, use of directives, timely decision-making, access to intelligence and security.  Further detail is within JDP 3-05, 
Special Forces Operations. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-20 3rd Edition 
intelligence picture, embellish information from other systems and cue systems 
to confirm intelligence or trigger interdiction.  SF may also provide a more 
appropriate means of obtaining information in hostile terrain or climates.  
Where ambiguity exists, the ability of SF to act on initiative and interpret 
information can provide ground truth, while the capacity to reach and 
communicate with civilians and indigenous forces may be key. 
b.      Offensive Action.  Offensive action is designed to achieve a focused 
effect with a minimu
m of unintended consequences.  Actions are directed 
against high value strategic or operational targets, which may require covert 
infiltration or specialist techniques.  Offensive action may be conducted in 
patrol to multiple squadron strength, independently or supported by 
conventional forces. 
c.      Support and Influence.  Support and influence activities are often 
conducted in support of other government departm
ents, usually as part of 
wider political or military objectives.  The role encompasses: training tasks to 
support foreign and security policy; support or influence of third parties, such 
as, forward presence, training and liaison with allies and other relevant parties; 
hearts and minds support to, and influence of, indigenous populations; raising, 
training and supporting indigenous forces; and influence activities.  Although 
SF operations are normally conducted covertly the product may be used to 
support the Information Strategy. 
Command and Control 
274. Command of SF is retained at the highest appropriate level to ensure best use 
of available resources.  Routine support is provided by the SF Support Group.  Other 
regular elements are, however
, also earmarked to support SF operations.  Where assets 
are assigned to SF, the JTFC may delegate OPCON, Tactical Command (TACOM) or 
Tactical Control (TACON) to the JFSFCC.  If C2 is not transferred to the JFSFCC, 
then direct liaison authority is normally given to ensure cooperation during planning 
and execution. 
275. During joint operations SF C2 is exercised at one of 2 levels.  Operations may 
be m
ounted by the Joint Commander using SF assigned by Chief of the Defence Staff 
(CDS) or a JFSFC may be assigned to a JTF.  Operational Command (OPCOM) of 
assigned SF is normally delegated to the Joint Commander, in accordance with CDS’ 
Directive, and exercised through Director Special Forces, as Commander SF.8  
OPCON may be delegated to a national or multinational commander and exercised 
through a JFSFCC.  OPCON is normally delegated to the JTFC when SF tasks fall 
                                           
8 In certain circumstances SF may conduct operations, under the direct control of the Ministry of Defence, which will be 
conducted under the OPCOM of Director Special Forces, who is responsible to Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-21 3rd Edition 
within his Joint Operations Area (JOA).  The JTFC normally then delegates TACOM, 
or occasionally OPCON, to the JFSFCC. 
276. Joint Force Special Forces Component Commander.  The responsibilities 
of the JFSFCC includ
e, but are not limited to, planning, coordinating, allocating, and 
tasking SF based on the JTFC’s Concept of Operations (CONOPS).  Specific JFSFCC 
responsibilities include: 
a.      Acting as a JTFC in his own right drawing together elements from other 
components for a SF-led operation. 
b.      Contributing to the JTFC’s estimate and developing, maintaining and 
im
plementing SF operations that best support the JTFC’s intent. 
c.      Acting as a supported or supporting component commander. 
d.      Providing functional advice to the JTFC on the correct employment of 
SF and contributing to planning as appropriate. 
e.      Coordinating with the other com
ponent commanders to ensure unity of 
effort. 
f.      Exercising C2 of SF and other assets assigned by the JTFC. 
277. Joint Force Special Forces Component Headquarters.  The JFSFCHQ is 
normally deployed alongside a JTFHQ.  In m
ultinational operations, it would form 
part of the Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force, normally with a liaison 
party at the JTFHQ.  The JFSFCHQ could be deployed independently but would 
require logistic support and has only a limited step-up capability.  The specific 
responsibilities of the JFSFCHQ include: 
a.      Deploying, sustaining and recovering SF task groups. 
b.      Issuing planning guidance, analysing courses of action, developing 
CONOPS, identifying and securing supporting assets. 
c.      Ensuring rules of engagement are appropriate and requesting changes 
where necessary. 
d.      Approvi
ng, controlling, de-conflicting and monitoring the execution and 
sustainment of SF operations, and evaluating result
s. 
e.      Placing coordinating teams in the requisite headquarters and nom inating 
liaison officers within the JTFHQ. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-22 3rd Edition 
278. Task Organisation.  The UK JFSFCC can command up to three SF task 
groups within the JOA.  Each is
 led by a SF unit commander supported by his own 
headquarters and comprising a number of SF sub-units, task-organised for the mission. 
SECTION VI – LOGISTIC COMPONENT 
279. A JFLogC provides the focal point for logistic support and optimum means of 
controlli
ng logistic assets spread across components.  While component logistics are 
focused forward, the JFLogC not only looks forward to provide logistic support to 
them but also looks back to monitor the logistic activities of the strategic base.  A 
JFLogC is likely to be deployed when the scale or complexity of the operation exceeds 
the capacity of JTFHQ J1/J4 staff.  The JFLogC undertakes the more practical aspects 
of operational and tactical logistics, allowing JTFHQ J1/J4 staff to concentrate on 
critical campaign logistic factors.  Additional detail on the JFLog C is within JDP 4-00 
Logistics for Joint Operations. 
Characteristics 
280. The JFLogCC delivers coherent support to the JTF by taking responsibility for 
activities of benefit to 2 or more com
ponents, coordination between components and 
the appropriate use of their logistic resources.  Some low level systems may, however, 
continue to operate directly between components and the strategic base. 
281. The JFLogC manages the Reception, Staging and Onward Moveme nt 
(RSOM)9 of force elements and sustains the operation.  It controls the theatre end of 
the coupling bridge and ensures that stocks arrive in theatre and are distributed in 
accordance with the JTFC’s priorities.10  A JFLogC is not responsible for the detailed 
management of component logistics but does exercise a coordinating function to 
ensure that the JTFC’s priorities are met.  A JFLogC may be allocated a specified Area 
of Operations, for which it has force protection and other responsibilities.  If this is not 
the case, close liaison with the headquarters performing this function is necessary.  The 
specific JFLogC responsibilities are to: 
a.      Command all logistic assets assigned to the JFLogC in the JOA.  It 
contributes to the JTFHQ estimate process and liaises with coalition partners, 
deployed contractors and the host nation. 
b.      Coordinat
e in-theatre logistic support, in accordance with the JTFC’s 
priorities, through activation and maintenance of robust lines of 
communication.  Components retain command of their integral logistic assets, 
                                        
   
9 The JFLogC will be responsible for the RSOM element of Reception, Staging, Onward Movement and Integration 
(RSOI).  It will assist in the integration process but this is a J3-led activity. 
10 The JTFC’s priorities will be reflected within the Theatre Priorities List but will be overlaid by strategic priorities from 
PJHQ. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-23 3rd Edition 
unless otherwise directed by the JTFC.  However, to maximise efficiency, the 
JFLogC is normally given coordinating authority. 
c.      Establish and manage the Recognised Theatre Logistic Picture, as part 
of the Joint Operating Picture. 
282. National Support Element.  A national support element provides the national 
logistic focus to a Jo
int Commander within a multinational operation.  It delivers a 
coordination and liaison function between the UK, other coalition forces and the Joint 
Commander.  A JFLogC may adopt the role of national support element; however, the 
complexity of multinational logistic coordination may demand a separate national 
support element.  A national support element is responsible for coordinating national 
operational logistic activity across the force.  National support elements, therefore, 
have a wider involvement in component logistics than a JFLogC, representing national 
requirements at all levels to the Joint Commander.  The complexity of the operation, 
number of nations and the need to act as a logistic lead nation or logistic role specialist 
nation will determine the nature of a national support element. 
Contribution to Joint Operations 
283. A JFLogC is critical to preparing, projecting, sustaining and recovering the 
JTF and carries out a range of specific functions in support of a deployed force: 
a.      Theatre Activation.  The Theatre Activation Party conducts 
reconnaissance and implements in-country resource arrangements for the 
receipt of a larger enabling force and JFLogCHQ.  I
ts size is dictated by the 
range of skills required to supplement a deployed Operational Liaison and 
Reconnaissance Team. 
b.      Movement Control.  JTFHQ movement staff set intra- theatre and, in 
conjunction with PJHQ, inter-theatre transport and movement policy and 
priorities.  They have a close relationship with the JFLogCHQ, which is 
responsi
ble for conducting RSOM.  The Joint Force Movement Staff, who 
initially execute the movement plan, deploy early but may re-deploy to support 
other operations once the JFLogC is established.  
c.      Establishing In-Theatre Movement and Life Support.  The JF LogC 
is responsible for coordinating intra-theatre movement, including related life 
support.  This normally requires joint control to optimise transport assets.  
d.      Reception, Staging, Onward Movement and Integration.  Reception, 
Staging, Onward Movement and Integr
ation (RSOI) is a complex joint C2 
operation.  It draws together the movements and administrative functions 
necessary to move, process, accommodate and provide life support to a 
transiting force.  The RSOM element is normally controlled by the 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-24 3rd Edition 
JFLogCHQ, in liaison with the JTFHQ, in order to provide a timely response 
to late force element table changes.  The integration element involves all 
components; the JFLogC is likely to deliver some aspects of integration for the 
whole force and may well enable other aspects, such as the provision of 
ranges.  Control of integration activity is likely to be primarily a component 
responsibility in conjunction with J3. 
e.      Intra-Theatre Supply.  The JFLogC controls intra-theatre air transport 
and usually main supply routes. 
f.      Logistic Support.  Effective joint support to operations depends upon 
the JFLogCC exercising coordination authority over all in-theatre logisti
c 
assets, as well as command of those units which provide joint support.  Force 
level logistic support encompasses supply and distribution, movements, 
maintenance, infrastructure, provision of fuel, water, electrical power, 
temporary deployable accommodation as well as medical and personnel 
administrative support.  This support may be provided from UK or 
multinational sources, from the host nation, from contractors or from other in-
country resources. 
g.      Force Supply and Distribution.  Inventory control and prioritisation is 
fundam
ental to the efficiency of a line of communication.  Routine demands 
do not normally pass through the JFLogCHQ, and are extracted using the 
appropriate supply systems.  However, the JFLogC monitors the joint supply 
chain to ensure it meets operational requirements.  Supply and distribution 
units under command of the JFLogCC are responsible for the receipt, storage, 
control, maintenance, accounting and distribution of operational logistic stocks 
for environmental components, in accordance with the JTFC’s priorities. 
Command and Control 
284. Standing Joint Force Logistic Component.  The UK maintains a 1* Standing 
JFLogCHQ under OPCOM of Chief Joint Opera
tions.  It consists of personnel drawn 
from all 3 Services and is commanded by the Commander Joint Force Logistic 
Operations.  The headquarters is held at very high readiness to provide a rapidly 
deployable logistic C2 node for contingent operations.  It forms the core of a deployed 
JFLogCHQ at medium scale, drawing augmentation from the authorised 
Augmentation Manning List and embedded headquarters specialists from all 3 
Services and Defence Equipment and Support. 
285. Joint Force Logistic Headquarters.  The JFLogCHQ is task-organised.  It 
will vary in size and range of staf
f capabilities according to the nature of the operation.  
In a multinational operation the JFLogCHQ is likely to contribute a substantial slice of 
the UK national support element. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-25 3rd Edition 
286. Single Component Headquarters.  The deployment of a JFLogCHQ affects 
com
ponent C2.  The JTFC can brigade assets under a JFLogC for specific phases of 
the operation.  Component logistic staffs coordinate and develop their elements of the 
JTFC’s campaign in conjunction with JFLogCHQ.  Components normally maintain C2 
of forward support, 1st and 2nd Line and afloat support as there is no inherent benefit in 
imposing joint logistic structures at this level.  Occasionally, a component is given the 
lead to assume specialist tactical level logistic responsibility for a JTF, particularly 
where other component contributions to the operation are minimal. 
287. Logistic Detachments.  In any joint operation there are likely to be JFLogC 
units posit
ioned in areas separated from the main supply area, such as forward 
mounting bases and forward logistic sites.  Consequently, the JFLogCHQ needs to 
establish logistic detachments that can provide essential logistic support functions at 
dispersed locations. 
SECTION VII – JOINT FORCE ELEMENTS 
288. Some specialist, and often scarce, force elements provide critical cross-
component capabilities.  
To ensure efficient employment they demand C2 at the JTF 
level and are not generally delegated to component commanders.  They are referred to 
collectively as joint force elements.  Discrete national contributions, as well as 
embedded component assets, may be brigaded under the control of a specific 
commander within the JTFHQ.  Specialist coordination at the operational level 
provides a pan-JOA view and the ability to re-balance resources across the JTF.  Joint 
headquarters may provide a force generation function in support of front line 
commands or actually deploy supporting headquarters elements, possibly embedded 
within the JTFHQ.  The following list is not exhaustive.  
289. Joint Ground Based Air Defence.  The JTFC normally tasks the JFACC with 
the 
roles of Area Air Defence Authority and Air Control Authority.  The JFACHQ 
Combined/Joint Air Operations Cell exercises TACOM/TACON of all assigned 
ground based air defence; when assigned, component commanders will exercise 
TACOM/TACON.  The Joint Ground Based Air Defence Headquarters generates force 
elements and augments the JFACHQ.  It does not deploy as an independent 
headquarters. 
290. Joint Force Engineers.  Guided by the JTFC’s  CONOPS, the Joint Force 
Engineer controls all JTF engineer assets and sets their priorities.  In particular, he 
should determine the balance between force and combat support.  Joint Force Engineer 
staff and force elements are likely to be some of the first enablers to deploy.  
Subsequently, the staff will be embedded within the JTFHQ.  The standing Joint Force 
Engineer is Commander 8 Force Engineer Brigade. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-26 3rd Edition 
291. Joint Explosive Ordnance Disposal.  Joint explosive ordnance disposal is an 
operational explosive
 ordnance disposal capability maintained by all 3 Services for use 
in their respective environments.  However, enhanced synergy is achieved by C2 
through the Joint Explosive Ordnance Disposal Cell, from within the JTFHQ.11 
292. Joint Helicopter Force.  A single joint helicopter force may be formed from  
component battlefield helicopters from the outset.  The Joint Helicopter Force 
Headquarters provides a focus for the C2 of all battlefield helicopter force elements.  
The joint helicopter force commander may sit within the JTFHQ, in order to provide 
direct advice, or deploy within a stand-alone headquarters.  To undertake all of the 
endorsed roles of battlefield helicopters, a mixed fleet is required. 
293. Joint Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear Regiment.  The Joint 
Chemical
, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Regiment provides CBRN 
protection support for operations.  It is an essentially modular organisation designed to 
address different elements of the CBRN hazard and will be deployed on a threat-
based, task-organised basis.  The regimental headquarters, potentially with other 
multinational CBRN headquarters, is likely to be located within the JTFHQ but could 
be subordinated to component level. 
294. 15 (UK) Psychological Operations Group.  Psychological Operations 
(PSYOPS) planning should start as a crisis develops.  15 (UK) PSYOPS Group may 
co
mmence work prior to DCMO planning activities.  They are, subsequently, likely to 
be consulted during the production of strategic direction.  At the operational level the 
Joint Commander’s Directive will provide guidance within the Information Operations 
(Info Ops) annex.  Within the JTFHQ, PSYOPS will be the responsibility of J3 
(Operations Support) augmented by a PSYOPS Support Element from 15 (UK) 
PSYOPS Group.  Tactical PSYOPS teams are deployed at component level. 
295. Joint Force Communications and Information Systems.  The com plexity of 
joint CIS will usually demand a Commander Joint Force CIS.  The Joint Commander’s 
Directive will set out responsibilities for the direction of CIS and information 
communications services to meet the JTFC’s intent.  Typically, Commander Joint 
Force CIS will be delegated OPCON of all CIS assets, less SF.  He will draw core staff 
from JFHQ J6, augmented by staff from PJHQ, front line commands and other 
organisations.  The Commander Joint Force CIS is likely to be either Commander 1 or 
11 Signal Brigade. 
296. Joint Data Link Management Organisation.  The Joint Data  Link 
Management Organisation is responsible for the planning, design coordination, 
management and execution of data link activities in line with the JTFC’s direction.  
Joint Data Link Management Organisation elements may, however, be delegated to, 
                                           
11 The Joint Explosive Ordnance Disposal Cell is always commanded by the Joint Force Engineer. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-27 3rd Edition 
and physically located with, a lead component headquarters.  When deployed the Joint 
Data Link Management Organisation is specifically responsible for: 
a.      The provision of Link 16 network designs. 
b.      The coordination of data link frequency clearance requirements. 
c.      The planning and development of data link architectures. 
d.      The tasking of data link operations via the multi-data link managem ent 
plan and OPTASK LINK and associated monitoring and management. 
297. Military Stabilisation and Support Group.  Civil-Military Cooperation 
(CIMIC) is the pract
ical application of a comprehensive approach and a means by 
which the JTFC may achieve, indirectly, psychological effect.  It is critical that it is 
woven into the campaign from the outset and, given the diverse range of actors, 
managed at the operational level.  Organic CIMIC staff will be embedded within the 
JTFHQ.  In addition, the Military Stabilisation and Support Group will act as a source 
of staff augmentation and provide CIMIC Support Teams, to conduct field 
assessments, functional specialists and liaison officers.  Related tasks may demand the 
allocation of manpower and material resources by the JTFC, particularly Joint Force 
Engineer. 
298. The Defence Operational Languages Support Unit.  The ability to 
communicate ef
fectively with the full range of actors while maintaining Operations 
Security (OPSEC) is critical.  The Defence Operational Languages Support Unit is 
responsible for delivering high level12 operational language capability to the JTF.  The 
range of functions to be supported and the relative dispersion of headquarters and 
force elements will shape the force element table.  Support is likely to reflect a mix of 
military personnel, contracted civilians and locally employed civilians.  Trained 
military personnel will be employed when OPSEC or deployability considerations 
preclude the use of civilians with first language skills.  The Defence Operational 
Languages Support Unit will provide advice and assistance regarding training and 
deployment of trained unit language personnel as low level13 operational language 
capability.  High level linguists should be managed centrally in theatre by SO2 
Language Capability Management, who will also advise Labour Support Unit staff on 
the hiring and training of locally employed civilians. 
299. Operational Intelligence Support Groups.  An Operational Intelligence 
Support Group (OISG) provides a deployable and scalable facility to com
plement the 
organic J2 capability.  It is able to reachout to national intelligence support and 
                                           
12 ‘High level’ refers to linguists that are NATO STANAG SLP 3 or higher and employed primarily as linguists.  
13 ‘Low level’ refers to linguists that are NATO STANAG SLP 2 or lower and whose language skills are secondary to 
their primary duties. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-28 3rd Edition 
specialist capabilities in order to provide assessed material and fused multi-
intelligence product, particularly at higher levels of classification.  When deployed it 
should be placed at OPCOM CJO and OPCON Chief J2.  It is able to: 
a.      Operate with the All Source Analysis Cell. 
b.      Contribute to targeting. 
c.       Form a key element in intelligen
ce exploitation. 
d.      Process material from UK sources and produce fused intelligence 
product. 
e.      Provide releasable intelligence to Allies.  
f.      Support the Intelligence Requirements Management process. 
g.      Prepare sanitised product for local dissemination.  
300. Each OISG is structured to meet specific theatre and operational needs, but it is 
likely to contain: 
a.      Analytical Element.  The analytical element links the OISG specialist 
intelligence elements and the J2 staff 
structure.  It includes a bespoke 
intelligence database and supporting CIS.  A Defence Intelligence Staff analyst 
is often included in the analytical element.  
b.      Specialist Intelligence Elements.  National intelligence organisations 
are represented by specialist intelligence elements, which facilitate direct 
reachout to parent organisations.  The elements listed below have a limited 
processing cap
ability and not all will be represented: 
(1)    Human Intelligence Specialist Intelligence Element.  Either the 
Defence Human Intelligence (HUMINT) Unit or UK national agency 
provides the HUMINT Specialist Intelli
gence Element.  It provides 
coordination between national and military HUMINT operations. 
(2)    Signals Intelligence Support Element.  The Signals Intelligence 
(SIGINT) element is drawn from the Transportable Cryptological 
Support Group of the National Signals Intelligence Organisation.  It 
provides the focus for SIGINT analysis and dissemi
nation within the 
OISG. 
(3)    Geospatial Intelligence Team.  The Geospatial Intelligence 
Team
 provides geospatial intelligence expertise to the OISG and J2, 
including geographic information and intelligence.  It also supports the 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-29 3rd Edition 
analysis in a common spatial context of intelligence from other specialist 
elements and the All Source Analysis Cell.  The Geospatial Intelligence 
Team usually has its own geospatial analyst and additional support from 
local geospatial elements can be provided through them.  Imagery 
Intelligence (IMINT) and imagery derived measurement and signature is 
provided by deployed assets, including the Tactical IMINT Wing, by 
reachout to the National Imagery Exploitation Centre and access to 
Allied capabilities. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2-30 3rd Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2A-1 3rd Edition 
ANNEX 2A – INTER-COMPONENT COORDINATION AND 
LIAISON 
Recipient Component Donor 
Component Maritime 
(M) 
Land (L) Air (A) Special 
Forces (SF) 
Logistics 
Maritime  MCE(L) 
 
MCE(A) 
(See Note 1)
(See Note 2) (See Note 3)
Land BCD(M)  BCD(A) (See Note 2) (See Note 5)
Air ALE(M) 
(See Note 1) 
ACCE/ALE
(L) 
 ALE(SF) (See Note 6)
SF (See Note 2) SF LO (See Note 2)  NA 
Log (See Note 4) (See Note 4) (See Note 4) (See Note 4)  
Key: 
ACCE - Air Component Coordination Element 
ALE - Air Liaison Element  
MCE - Maritime Coordination Element 
BCD - Battlefield Coordination Detachment 
LO - Liaison Officer 
Notes: 
1. MCE(A) and ALE(M) are comple mentary peacetime staff billets. 
2. Special Forces (SF) LOs are not routinel y provided to the Joint Force Maritime 
Component Commander (JFMCC) and Joint Force Air Component Commander 
(JFACC).  The JFMCC and Joint Force Land Component Commander (JFLCC) do not 
routinely provide LOs to the Joint Force Special Forces Component Commander 
(JFSFCC).  LOs will be allocated on a case-by-case basis (SF has dedicated air 
support assets which provide their own LOs at the tactical level). 
3. Commander UK Maritime Force is comple mented with his own logistic team 
who provide support to all units under command of the JFMCC. 
4. The Standing Joint Force Logistics Component Headquarters (SJFLogCHQ) 
establishes bespoke liaison structures for each operation, on a case-by-case basis. 
5. Land has dedicated logistics brigades.  The JFLog C directs the logistic 
affiliations for Army units deployed in direct support of other components. 
6. Organic support to deployed RAF units is provided by the Air Logistic Cell, 
which is part of the JFACHQ. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 2A-2 3rd Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-1 3rd Edition Change 1  
CHAPTER 3 – JOINT ACTION 
Chapter 3 describes how the Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC), assisted by his 
Chief of Staff (COS), orchestrates the capabilities and activities within Joint Action to 
realise his intent. 
Section I –  Strategic Communication 
Section II – Joint Action 
Section III – Types of Activity 
Section IV – Freedom of Action 
Section V – Joint Action Bedrock Capabilities 
301. A JTFC’s role is to direct and orchestrate the tacti cal activities of the 
components; refocusing effort when necessary, to achieve the best synergy between 
tactical formations or components.  While tactical or component commanders possess 
the means to conduct military activities at the tactical level, their capabilities are 
invariably most effective when integrated and synchronised. 
302. The complexity of conflict allied to  the dynamic nature of the information 
environment means t
hat prescriptive plans are unlikely to prove successful against an 
adaptive opponent.1  As a consequence, resilient but pragmatic mechanisms are 
required to assess the progress of operations and adjust where required.  A JTFC 
requires not only formal contingency plans to address outcomes that have been 
foreseen, but also the agility to cope with uncertainty and the unexpected. 
303. Once execution is underway, orchestr ation becomes ever m ore challenging and 
a JTFC needs to maintain a clear perspective of the underlying purpose of activities 
and the desired effects.  This will allow him to respond rapidly and effectively to 
events.   
SECTION I – STRATEGIC COMMUNICATION 
304. The MOD defines strategic communication as: advancing national interests by 
using all defence means of communication to influence the attitudes and behaviours of 
people.2  It is the mechanism by which the levers of power are integrated in support of 
the overall information strategy.3  Its purpose is to ensure that the MOD’s words and 
actions are coordinated, both within the MOD and across government, to achieve the 
desired effect on target audiences. 
                                           
1 The information environment consists of the domains (physical, virtual and cognitive) and the inter-relationships within 
them.  Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 1/11 Strategic Communication: The Defence Contribution. 
2 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1 UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database (8th Edition).  This 
definition is a clear, succinct distillation of the National Security Council’s definition. 
3 Diplomatic, military and economic enabled by information.  JDP 0-01 British Defence Doctrine (BDD) (4th Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-2 3rd Edition Change 1  
305. Chief of Defence Staff’s (CDS’) Directive to the Joint Commander will 
contain a strategic communications plan setting out desired target audience behaviour 
and the key them
es and messages set within a strategic narrative.  The Joint Force 
seeks to influence audience behaviour by delivering its message through its words, 
images and actions together with those of its allies and partners.4  As part of his 
planning process, the JTFC uses a focus on desired behaviours and information effect 
as the basis of his campaign design.  Consequently, it defines both his theory of 
change and his concept of operations.  The plan is then delivered through the 
integration and synchronisation of activities under Joint Action.5  
306. The JTFC’s campaign plan will include  key themes and messages derived from 
the inform
ation and targeting annexes contained in CDS’ Directive and linked to the 
behavioural objectives.  They will be based on an understanding of target audiences 
and provide further basis for the crafting of operational/tactical actions by 
components, thus ensuring that tactical activities are coherent with the strategic 
communication campaign.  
SECTION II – JOINT ACTION 
307. Definition of Joint Action.  Joint Action is defined as: the deliberate use and 
orchestration of military capabilities and activities to affect an actor’s will, 
understanding and capability, and the cohesion between them to achieve influence.6  
Joint Action is implemented through the orchestration of:  
Information Activities To manipulate information, or perceptions of 
information, to primarily affect understanding 
Fires The deliberate use of physical, or virtual,7 
means to achieve, primarily, physical effects8 
Outreach 
Outreach includes stabilisation, support to 
governance, capacity building, and 
regional/local engagement 
Manoeuvre Used to gain advantage in time and space 
                                           
4 This includes broadcast mediums of print, loudspeaker, radio, television and internet. 
5 The JTFC’s theory of change is his big idea of how the operation will change the current operational conditions to the 
future desired conditions, JDP 5-00 Campaign Planning (2nd Edition Change 1).  
6 This is a new definition which replaces the definition in JDP 0-01.1 (8th Edition). 
7 Computer Network Operations (CNO) or cyber. 
8 Revised definition. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-3 3rd Edition Change 1  
This definition of Joint Action recognises:  
 the centrality of influence as an objective;  
 the integration of activities to realise it; and   
 our need to influence not only an adversary but a range of actors 
including our own population and forces, allies, civilian partners and 
regional audiences.   
Although an integral part of the UK’s approach to campaigning, Joint Action is neither 
a new capability nor an activity in its own right.  Instead, it is a framework for 
considering the integration, coordination and synchronisation of all military activity 
within the battlespace.  Throughout, it must be cognisant of, and coherent with, non-
military lines of operation. 
308. Joint Action and the Manoeuvrist Appr oach.  The manoeuvrist approach to 
operations applies strength against identified vulnerabilities, involving predominantly 
indirect ways and means of targeting the intellectual and moral component of an 
opponent’s fighting power.9  Emphasis is placed on achieving objectives through 
ingenuity and even guile, rather than simply physical destruction of capability.  Thus it 
is equally applicable to contemporary operations and campaigns where the campaign 
objectives are centred on behavioural outcomes. The manoeuvrist approach and Joint 
Action are inextricably linked as both seek to undermine an actor’s will by affecting 
his understanding and capability. 
Bringing Influence to Bear 
309. Influence is achieved when the behavi our of a target group is changed through 
the com
bination of words, images and actions.10  These will be interpreted through the 
prism of a target’s culture, traditions, environment and perception, which together 
comprise his understanding of a situation.  This understanding is linked to a will to act, 
or not act, and a capability to do so; thus determining the effectiveness of a target 
group. 
310. Understanding.  In the context of decision-making, understanding is defined 
as: the per
ception and interpretation of a particular situation in order to provide the 
context, insight and foresight required for effective decision-making.11  An actor’s 
understanding of the situation will underpin his decision-making process.  It comes 
from situational awareness which, once analysed, provides comprehension or insight.12 
Applied judgement will provide foresight, which in turn will be influenced  
                                           
9 JDP 0-01 British Defence Doctrine (BDD) (4th Edition). 
10 JDP 3-40, Security and Stabilisation: The Military Contribution. 
11 JDP 0-01.1 (8th Edition). 
12 In intelligence usage, situational awareness is: the ability to identify trends and linkages over time, and to relate these 
to what is happening and what is not happening.  JDP 0-01.1 (8th Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-4 3rd Edition Change 1  
by preconceptions.  Culture and intellect, as well as doctrine, also shape thinking, 
perceptions and decisions.  Understanding is relevant in many ways:  
 an actor’s understanding of his core narrative; his fighting strength and 
that of his opponent;  
 his understanding of the effectiveness of his own activities and those 
conducted against him; and  
 his understanding of his vulnerabilities and the future threats that face 
him.  
These are neither certain nor absolute, and understanding will be driven by the specific 
information an actor receives, and his particular perspective, rather than reality.  An 
actor’s understanding of the situation, together with his understanding of ours, affects 
his perceptions and, so, his will.  As a campaign develops so will understanding.  This 
requires a JTFC and his staff to maintain a flexible approach, have an adaptable 
campaign plan, continually test assumptions and, if necessary, formally conduct a new 
estimate. 
311. Capability.  An actor’ s capacity for action is dependent upon his physical 
capability and its use in context.  Although quantity and quality tend to confer 
advantage, other factors also impact effectiveness.  Some factors, such as time and 
space, are contextual, but others, such as apportionment of resources, are subject to 
commanders’ discretion and hence susceptible to influence.  Consequently, the denial 
of certain aspects of capability, such as communication nodes (aids to understanding) 
and information technologies (aids to exerting influence including media), may have a 
disproportionate impact on overall effectiveness.  However, when planning the denial 
of such capabilities, it is critical to consider whether they may be of future use to the 
friendly campaign. 
312. Will.  Will is the faculty by which a person decides upon, and initiates, a 
course of action.  It encompas
ses the will to act or resist.  At the strategic level, it is 
likely to be based upon national culture, ideology and political resolve.  At the 
operational and tactical levels, it is likely to be based upon the social unity of 
communities of interest or armed groups, their morale, esprit de corps and cohesion.  
There are parallels between will and the moral component of fighting power.  An 
actor’s will can be affected directly; concentrated fires can dissuade an opponent from 
further resistance.  It can also be affected indirectly; an opponent who is denied the 
ability to understand his situation, for example, may lose the will to act and be inclined 
to compromise or acquiesce.  There is also considerable potential for activities to have 
significant unintended and undesirable effects.  For example, fires may cause 
collateral damage of such political, social or ideological significance that an 
opponent’s will to act or resist is strengthened, despite his capability being depleted. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-5 3rd Edition Change 1  
313. Cohesion.  Both will and cohesion remain fundamental to a group’s ability to 
exert influence, fight or resist effectively
.  The manoeuvrist approach is based upon 
breaking an opponent’s collective will and shattering his cohesion.  Collective will 
mobilises a gathering of individuals and groups in pursuit of common goals.  
Adherence to collective will may be based upon a variety of motivations, ranging in 
strength from tacit acceptance, through active subscription, to absolute allegiance.  A 
group’s cohesion reflects the extent to which these motivations successfully bind 
individuals together as a cooperative body.  At a more practical level, cohesion enables 
an actor to exploit his understanding and effectively use his capabilities.  Cohesion, 
enhanced by interoperability, may enable shared situational awareness, facilitate 
battlespace management and allow effective force integration.  Where such close 
cooperation is not possible, or is interrupted, disparate force elements may be less 
effective. 
314. Relationships.  The relationships between understanding and capability may 
vary between dif
ferent actors and situations.  Understanding that these elements are 
inter-related, and that they are also linked to cohesion and capacity, is fundamental to a 
full appreciation of how to affect them. 
SECTION III – TYPES OF ACTIVITIES 
315. Through the operational planning proces s, the JTFC and his staff will have 
developed an understanding of the wider operational context as well as the specific 
supporting effects to be realised in the physical, virtual and cognitive domains.  This 
includes: information activities; fires; outreach activities; and manoeuvre. 
316. Information Activities .  Information activities provide a range of non-lethal 
tools tailored specifically to deliver information in such a manner as to affect 
understanding or perceptions.  These include Information Operations (Info Ops),13 
Media Operations (Media Ops), and Civil Military Cooperation (CIMIC) and provide 
the capability, or perceived capability, to affect the character or behaviour of someone 
or something.14  (Information activities are covered in detail at Annex 3A).  
Information activities affect understanding through the manipulation of information in 
both the physical and virtual domains.  A lack of accurate situational understanding 
impacts an actor’s effective use of capability; potentially affecting, indirectly, his will 
to act.  While activities in the physical domain undoubtedly have such effects, the 
focus for information activities in the cognitive domain is to achieve psychological 
effects.  Information activities may deliver significant effect for comparatively few 
resources.  However, their orchestration and assessment can be especially challenging 
because: 
                                           
13 Information operations includes Psychological Operations (PSYOPS), and deception. 
14 JDP 0-01 BDD, (4th Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-6 3rd Edition Change 1  
a. The number and variety of actors involved tend to frustrate simple causal 
relationships.  Individuals’ responses to information activities will vary 
according to their culture, values and perceptions. 
b. Compared with fires, information activities take effect in unforeseen 
ways and timescales, and their measurement and assessment pose different 
challenges.  The Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ) should supplement 
objective measures with more subjective assessments, including those of the 
JTFC, with his unique access to key stakeholders and pan-theatre perspective. 
c. Unforeseen, unintended and undesirable effects may either negate 
intended effects, or make their achievement too costly.  For example, 
information activities often have less foreseeable unintended consequences. 
d. In some cases the JTFC will not own the capabilities required to deliver 
cognitive effects as they may be part of other agencies or on the non-security 
lines of operation.  The JTFC should give due weight in his command and 
control (C2) estimate to his connectivity and relationship with other agencies. 
317. Fires .  Fires are defined as: the deliberate use of physical and virtual means to 
achieve the realisation of, primarily, physical effects.15  They can be both lethal and 
non-lethal, and conducted in both the physical and virtual domains.  They are mainly 
focused on an actor’s capability (through destruction and attrition) including that 
which enables his understanding.  However, they may also be employed to directly, or 
indirectly, realise a wide range of psychological effects by shattering cohesion, 
degrading capability and thus impacting on will. 
318. Outreach Activities.  Outreach com prises a range of activities that are often, 
though not exclusively, linked to stabilisation operations.  They include security sector 
reform as well as infrastructure projects and support to governance, including Rule of 
Law.  These activities will often be conducted by, or with partners and offer 
opportunities for delivering a coordinated message supporting the overall information 
campaign.  Often linked to capacity building, they will have an impact on partners’ 
capability and a cognitive effect on a wider range of actors.  Therefore, they must be 
integrated and synchronised with the other elements of Joint Action. 
319. Manoeuvre.  Manoeuvre is defined as the coordinated activities necessary to 
gain advantage within a situation in time and space.16  It enables fires, information 
activities and outreach but may also realise effects in its own right.  For example, the 
act of deploying a capability to a position from which to conduct fires may deter an 
opponent from acting to the extent that the fires themselves become unnecessary. 
                                           
15 Revised definition derived from the Strategic Defence and Security Review, Future Force 2020, Joint Fires, paper 
written by Joint Capability dated 29 March 2011. 
16 Refined definition proposed in this Change 1 to JDP 3-00 Campaign Execution (3rd Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-7 3rd Edition Change 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1 – Illustration of How Activities May be Used to Affect Will, 
Understanding and Capability 
 
Will
Protect own
Affect others
Erode adversary
Fires Outreach Information Activities
Manoeuvre
Provides an enabling capability as well as an e ffect in its own right
Indirect impact on Will
Loss of capability may affect understanding. At the same time a lack of accurate situational
understanding impacts upon an actor’s effective use of capability. Together, these may
affect, indirectly, his will to act.
Capability
Build/protect own
Affect others
Erode adversary
Understanding
Develop/protect own
Enhance others
Affect adversary
Direct impact on Will
Manoeuvre and outreach realise effects in their
own right
Deployment of a force can deter an opponent
Regional engagement can reassure other
actors
Primary impact on
capability
‘including that which
enables him to
understand his situation’
Direct impact on Will
Concentrated fires
shatter an opponent’s
morale
Outreach activity can
develop friendly
capabilities and hence
morale
Direct impact on Will
Information activities
may encourage friendly
or neutral actors and/or
have a deterrent effect
to prevent a would-be
opponent acting at all
Primary impact on
understanding
Military Contribution to Influence
Primary impact on
capability and
understanding
Joint Action Model
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-8 3rd Edition Change 1  
 
320. While convenient  to visualise activities in terms of physical or psychological 
effects, as shown at Figure 3.1,
 any one effect may require orchestration of many 
different types of activity.  The effect which activities may achieve, and within which 
domain, should be viewed with an open mind.  The raison d’être of Joint Action, is to 
synchronise purposeful activities thus enhancing their effect to achieve influence. 
Brigading them by type simply provides structure, aids the allocation of planning and 
execution responsibility and, through integration, avoids stove pipes. 
Balancing Effort 
321. The relationships between fires,  information activities, outreach and 
manoeuvre, and their corresponding effect
 upon an actor’s capability, understanding 
and will, are likely to be complex and dynamic.  Analysis of these relationships is 
critical to a thorough comprehension of how to influence the situation. 
322. The contemporary operating environmen t is characterised by complexity and 
uncertainty
, with campaigns focused on delivering a particular behavioural effect 
within a target group.  Therefore, the traditional relationship between fires, 
information activities, outreach and manoeuvre, with fires and manoeuvre having 
primacy, is reversed with all activities in all domains being focused on supporting the 
information strategy to achieve influence.  This does not mean that in some 
circumstances fires, and/or manoeuvre, will not be decisive; rather, it is that they are 
supporting an influence plan rather than being an end in themselves.  
Operation TELIC 10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘We conduct all operations in order to influence people and events, to bring about 
change, whether by 155mm artillery shells or hosting visits: these are all influence 
operations.  We sought to make use of every lever we had to influence events.’ 
Major General G J Binns CBE DSO MC
General Officer Commanding Multinational Division (South East) – February 2008
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-9 3rd Edition Change 1  
323. Availability of precision-guided munitions has greatly improved the 
discriminatory capability of fires.  Howev
er, even in those situations where conflict is 
multi-faceted and complex, there may still be a requirement for accurate massed fires 
rather than simply precision ones.  In all scenarios, the employment of fires should be 
subject to rigorous planning to optimise weapon effect and balance against the risk of 
collateral damage.  In an operating environment where information flows freely, 
unforeseen effects such as unintended collateral damage, can limit a JTFC’s freedom 
of action and undermine coalitions and alliances.  Similarly, in situations with multiple 
armed groups, the depletion of one opponent’s capability may simply provide another 
opponent with greater freedom of action.  A conventional force’s fires may be only 
partially effective in countering irregular activists.  Their typically agile tactics and 
techniques may mitigate the impact of superior mass, technology and communications, 
while their ideological conviction may make them more resistant to the impact of 
physical degradation.  Nonetheless, they may remain vulnerable to psychological 
attack, aimed at diminishing their collective will, support among the population, or, in 
the case of proxy opponents, their sponsors. 
324. Information activities are also unlikely to be decisive in isolation, and their 
impact almo
st always relies upon the use or credible threat of force.  Information 
activities and fires, in conjunction with outreach and manoeuvre, should be mutually 
reinforcing. 
SECTION IV – FREEDOM OF ACTION 
325. Initially, the extent of a JTFC’s free dom of action will be shaped by national 
and multinational strategic decision-making leading to the direction inherent in the 
strategic narrative and the required information effect.  This context, and the force 
levels and capabilities allocated, may impact the JTFC’s ability to conduct operations 
within the Joint Operations Area (JOA).  Constraints will be context-specific and key 
factors at the operational level are likely to include legitimacy, sustainability and force 
protection. 
Legitimacy 
326. Legitimacy directly impacts the utility of force, conferring a freedom (even an 
obligation) to act, as well as a constraint on military ac
tivity at the operational level.17  
It provides the justification for any use of force and affects how it is applied.  It is an 
essential foundation upon which the JTFC builds and sustains campaign authority.  
Moreover, it bolsters morale and promotes cohesion within the Joint Task Force (JTF) 
as well as between multinational and multi-agency partners.  Legitimacy results from 
an amalgam of action that is compliant with national and international law and what is 
                                           
17 Legitimacy encompasses the legal, moral, political, diplomatic and ethical propriety of the conduct of military forces 
once committed; it forms an essential element of campaign authority.  BDD (4th Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-10 3rd Edition Change 1  
judged ethically and morally acceptable.  It is bounded, and constrained, by what is 
politically directed and what is militarily feasible. 
327. Rules of Engagement.  Rules of engagement will be issued as part of the Joint 
Commander’
s Directive.  They provide clear guidance on the circumstances and 
limitations under which forces can initiate and continue combat.  The JTFC, and all 
members of the force, must understand them prior to deployment so that they become 
a freedom rather than a constraint. 
328. Sustainment.  Sustainment is a critical campaign enabler.   It is the means by 
which fighting power and freedom of action are maintained.  It includes:  
 the maintenance and repair of vehicles;  
 equipment and materiel; the provision of combat supplies; and  
 the evacuation, treatment and replacement of casualties.   
A JTFC is responsible for the identification, planning and prioritisation of sustaining 
activities.  Operational-level sustainment and support is inherently joint, although the 
interface between it, and tactical provision, tends to be context-specific.  Early, and 
continued engagement by a JTFC, with clear direction from the outset, optimises the 
subsequent sustainment, support and therefore his freedom of action.18 
Force Protection 
329. Force protection is the means by which operational effectiveness is ma intained 
through countering the threats from opponents, as well as natural and human hazards, 
to ensure security and freedom of action.19  The JTFC must balance the effort between 
protecting his force, and undertaking the necessary shaping and decisive engagement 
to achieve the end-state.  It demands an awareness of the capabilities over which he 
has control and the appetite for risk.  The requirement for force protection varies with 
the situation and strategic imperatives.  A JTFC should be wary of undue caution or, 
the over-commitment of resources to guard against every perceived threat.  This may 
be particularly relevant in multinational and multi-agency operations, where nations 
and agencies may have differing views of the level of protection required and different 
perceptions of changes to the prevailing situation.  The JTFC should assess and 
manage the risks associated with different force protection options to enable mission 
accomplishment whilst sustaining political resolve.20 
 
 
                                           
18 JDP 4-00 Logistics for Joint Operations (3rd Edition). 
19 JDP 0-01.1 (8th Edition).  
20 JDP 3-64 Joint Force Protection. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-11 3rd Edition Change 1  
SECTION V – JOINT ACTION BEDROCK CAPABILITIES 
330. Joint Action relies upon a variety of functions and activities that allow the 
JTFC to integrate and synchronise single Service combat power within its Joint, inter-
agency and multinational operating framework.  This is the natural operating context 
and the foremost requirement is a well structured Joint, inter-agency and multinational 
command and control capability.  Where command and control is sound, a commander 
can:  
 respond better to unanticipated events;  
 more easily coordinate the relationship between fires, manoeuvre, 
outreach and information activities; and  
 be in a better position to achieve direct and indirect impact on capability, 
will and understanding. 
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance  
331. Intelligence is pivotal to Joint Action. 21  It allows the JTFC to conduct his 
decision-making with a comprehensive understanding of the context and the most 
timely and relevant information available.  Intelligence helps to frame the problem and 
to illuminate specific elements. 
332. Intelligence has traditionally focu sed on 2 overlapping and complementary 
subjects.   
 The actors – their characteristics, culture, capabilities, locations, 
intentions, relationships, objectives and vulnerabilities.22   
 The physical environment (geospatial) within which they operate.   
In the contemporary operating environment there is a third subject – the information 
environment, its composition and how it is used by the actors to receive information 
and transmit their narratives.  Intelligence helps to identify objectives by producing a 
detailed contextual picture of different actors.  Basic and current intelligence supports 
planning and initial execution of activity.  As the operation proceeds, the emphasis 
may shift from direct support to targeting and to providing time-sensitive information 
and intelligence.  Intelligence also supports assessment, enabling the JTFC to adjust 
his plan accordingly.  JDP 2-00 Understanding and Intelligence Support to Joint 
Operations (3rd Edition) addresses intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance in 
detail. 
                                           
21 Intelligence is: the directed and coordinated acquisition and analysis of information to assess capabilities, intent and 
opportunities for exploitation by leaders at all levels to further the national interest.  JDP 0-01.1 (8th Edition). 
22 Actors refers to friendly, neutral and adversarial. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-12 3rd Edition Change 1  
Targeting – A Full Spectrum Approach 
333. Joint Action depends upon co mprehensive, accurate and timely targeting; this is 
the process of selecting targets and matching the appropriate responses to them, taking 
account of the operational requirements and capabilities.23  It involves:  
 understanding what effects need to be achieved;  
 identifying the node or target through which the effect can be realised; 
and then 
 applying the appropriate resourced activity against that node or target.   
This approach, known as Full Spectrum Targeting is represented pictorially in Figure 
3.2.  It begins at the start of any planning process with a detailed target systems 
analysis.  This underpins the orchestration of all activities to ensure that they are 
focused on intended effects; all of which are set within the overarching narrative and 
executed in accordance with the laws of armed conflict.  The JTFC commands the 
targeting process at the operational level, which will have a substantial impact on 
campaign rhythm.  Annexes 3B and 4A expand upon the detailed mechanisms and 
structures that support this process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2 – Effects-Nodes-Action-Resources Model 
334. Scrutiny .  All targ eting is subject to different levels of legal and policy 
scrutiny to ensure legal compliance under national and international law.  The 
targeting directive provides direction and guidance to commanders and staff to meet 
                                           
23 A target is any area, structure, object, person, organisation, mindset, thought process, attitude or behaviour which can 
be influenced by a capability – thus targeting in its widest sense applies to all activity sets and not simply fires. 
JFHQ
ENDS
Components
WAYS MEANS
Effect
• Determine what you
want to achieve
• The end result of the
action, engagement
or operation
Action
Which actions,
lethal or non-lethal,
against the node
will produce the
desired effect?
Node
Who, or what, do
you need to target
to achieve the
effect?
(the affected)
Resources
Which resources
can perform the
desired action
(capabilities
and effectors)
ENAR
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-13 3rd Edition Change 1  
these legal and policy requirements.24  Operational-level targeting must fuse tactical 
activities within the Joint Operations Area with those directed by strategic decision-
makers, using strategic resources (such as Special Forces).  Moreover, given the 
potential for significant political, economic and legal ramifications, the decision to 
engage some targets may be subject to national ministerial control and multinational 
political influence. 
335. Targeted Activity.  Target systems analysis identifies potential target groups 
and considers their conditions, perceptions, attitudes and vulnerabilities.  The process: 
 identifies which targets must be affected in order to achieve the JTFC’s 
objective;  
 defines the activity that will deliver that effect; and  
 allocates resources against it.25   
Within the framework of Joint Action, it is equally applicable to, and must encompass, 
information activities, outreach and the psychological effects they deliver.  Physical 
targets may be easily established, appropriate fires identified, undesired effects 
accurately assessed and results measured.  In every aspect the targeting of information 
and outreach activities will be more challenging and the results less immediate and 
tangible.  However, the JTFC and his staff must be no less cognisant of distinction, 
proportionality, humanity and military necessity when operating outside the physical 
domain.  To be fully effective, the targeting process, and the activity it generates, 
should be conducted as an integrated activity with other government departments and 
agencies, as part of an integrated approach.  Further details on targeting, together with 
illustrative cycles and the Joint Action Synchronisation Matrix, are at Annex 3B. 
336. Unforeseen Consequences.  Any activity conducted (in either the physical, 
virtual or cognitive domains) will result in intended and/or unintended effects; these 
can be desired or undesired.  The extent will depend largely on our level of 
understanding at the time of execution.  Potential consequences can be foreseen during 
the planning process in the form of best/worst case scenarios and contingency plans 
developed.  The intent will be to see our actions achieve the desired result with as few 
unintended effects as possible.  Unforeseen consequences must be addressed as they 
arise; such consequences are not always negative and may provide opportunities for 
exploitation.26  Careful planning of Joint Action will reduce the potential impact of 
unintended effects upon the diplomatic and economic levers of power. 
                                           
24 The Targeting Directive is an annex to the CDS’ Directive to the Chief of Joint Operations and is produced by 
Targeting and Information Operations Department. 
25 The UK Joint Targeting and Battle Damage Assessment Policy paper, Vice Chief of Defence Staff endorsed, 
September 2005, established baseline principles primarily for fires.  
26 JDP 04 Understanding, Chapter 2. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-14 3rd Edition Change 1  
337. Prevention of Collateral Damage.  When em ploying fires, both physical and 
virtual (including offensive cyber operations), intelligence gathering assists in the 
identification of civilian structures, residences or networks within effective weapon 
radius.  Planners should take additional care to reduce, or eliminate entirely, the 
potential for civilian casualties, as well as to minimise damage to property and 
infrastructure.  Although difficult to assess and measure, the requirement to minimise 
the impact of unintended or unforeseen psychological effects, through fires or 
information activities, is equally important.  It could also be potentially critical in 
terms of the operational end-state and strategic aims. 
338. Assessment.  Assessment is a key comp onent of campaign management and 
critical to the successful application of Joint Action.  Targeting activity must be 
assessed through the J2 collection process.  While processes to support the assessment 
of physical effects are more refined and provide earlier information than those for 
cognitive effects, commanders and staffs must understand the different timelines 
associated with physical and cognitive effect.  They must resist the temptation to 
default to the former if progress with the latter appears to be slow. 
Coordination, Synchronisation and Integration 
339. During planning, the JTFC and his staff define the effects required, the specific 
activities necessary to realise them, and the syner
gy within an integrated approach.  
During execution, they orchestrate activities through detailed coordination, 
synchronisation and integration (based upon explicit priorities), applying capabilities 
when, and where, required.  This continual process of campaign management is the 
core JTFHQ function and reflects a combination of inter-related staff activities and 
decision-making processes.  Though individual headquarters may vary in some 
respects, the process will broadly be based on the construct of plan, refine and execute.  
Key considerations are detailed below. 
340. Battlespace Management.  Battlespace management is defined as: the 
adaptive means and measures that enable the dynamic synchr
onisation of activities.27  
It contributes directly to achieving physical and psychological effects, across all 
dimensions of the battlespace.28  It is an inherently joint process; planning should be 
driven by the JTFC and woven into the basic framework of his campaign plan.  He 
should consider, from the outset, the requirement for the integration of all force 
elements and other agencies operating in the Joint Operations Area.  However, the 
JTFC is unlikely to exercise command over all actors within the operating space, 
particularly within complex multinational and multi-agency operations.29  He can 
                                           
27 JDP 0-01.1 (8th Edition). 
28 There are 7 dimensions: maritime, land, air, space, information (including the internet), electro-magnetic and, time. 
29 Operating space represents all aspects of a Joint Operations Area in which activities, both military and non-military, 
take place.  It therefore differs from battlespace which, although being the same geographic area, applies to purely 
military activity.  
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-15 3rd Edition Change 1  
manage the battlespace, but not the whole operating space.  Battlespace management 
must be supplemented by cooperation, or at worst de-confliction, with others.  
Planning should be conducted on a centralised and collaborative basis, while execution 
should be decentralised, with much of the dynamic control being devolved to the 
tactical level.  The extent to which force elements and other actors interact will vary, 
from close integration to independence.  These different levels of interaction require 
different levels of battlespace management.  The JTFC must continuously manage and 
review the battlespace management plan, adjusting priorities and arbitrating between 
components as the situation develops.   
341. Combat Identification.  Combat Identification is defined as: the process of 
co
mbining situational awareness, target identification,30 specific tactics, training and 
procedures to increase operational effectiveness of weapon systems and reduce the 
incidence of casualties caused by friendly fire.31  It is a battlespace management 
measure that should provide the JTFC with rapid, secure, positive identification of 
platforms, equipment and personnel in, or approaching, the Joint Operations Area.  
Within prevailing rules of engagement, this will not only enhance freedom of action, 
efficiency of fires and exploitation of the battlespace, but also reduce fratricide.  
Incidences of fratricide, exacerbated by media coverage, will erode combat power, 
undermine the moral component of fighting power and create rifts within coalitions.  
While combat identification within the construct of Joint Action has impact principally 
on fires and manoeuvre, the requirement to avoid information fratricide demands the 
same coherence across information activities.  Despite technological advances, combat 
identification remains a complex and multifaceted challenge with a pivotal human 
element.  It depends, in many cases, on the physical and cognitive performance of 
highly trained, yet fallible, individual service personnel.  The UK doctrinal authority 
for combat identification is JDP 3-62 Combat Identification, which deals with the 
process in detail. 
342. Situational Awar eness.  Fed by intelligence, situational awareness provides 
the comprehension which is key to effective battlespace management and combat 
identification.  A common operating picture can significantly enhance decision-making 
and enable effective management of the battlespace.  An operating picture is not 
necessarily an electronic representation of the environment, force lay-down and 
intelligence picture.  Although this is a common format, it may sometimes be a simple 
pen picture of how the commander sees the battlespace.  The JTFC is responsible for 
ensuring that situational awareness is shared across his force and, where appropriate, 
with other actors.  Due to limitations in the information available and the fog of war, 
perfect situational awareness will be unachievable.  A JTFC should therefore 
continually assess what represents sufficient situational awareness.  Situational 
                                           
30 The process that allows the immediate determination of a contact’s identity by friendly, discrete platforms or 
individuals.  JDP 3-62 Combat Identification. 
31 JDP 0-01.1 (8th Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3-16 3rd Edition Change 1  
awareness is also influenced by differences in perception, interpretation and 
understanding.  Training, doctrine and experience enable a JTFC, his staff and 
subordinates to develop a common frame of reference for situational awareness.  
Shared situational awareness is especially challenging in multinational and multi-
agency operations.  Particular effort should be made to ensure that such understanding, 
much of which is implicit, is made as explicit as possible, with any differences in 
interpretation and understanding resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-1 3 rd Edition Change 1 
ANNEX 3A – THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FIRES AND 
INFORMATION ACTIVITIES 
Coercion 
3A1. UK Defence doctrine describes hard power as the threat of coercion to 
influence the behaviour of states, groups or individuals.1  To coerce is ‘to persuade an 
unwilling person to do something by using force or threats.’2  Military coercion 
therefore, involves deterring people from, or compelling them to do, something.  It 
works by making the consequences of an actor’s undesirable behaviour look 
unappealing while making alternatives seem attractive.  Incentives work well in 
tandem with threats and a good coercive strategy will involve graduated pressure and 
an integrated approach that uses all available capabilities.  The Joint Action model 
offers a mechanism that considers many different activities to execute this type of 
strategy. 
Fires 
 
3A2. Figure 3A.1 illustrates how various effects may b e realised both directly, and 
indirectly, through fires.  In practice, a Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC) plans 
fires to achieve a myriad of effects, giving emphasis to diminishing an opponent’s 
effectiveness directly (by attrition of his capability) or, indirectly (via his will and 
understanding). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3A.1 – Potential Effects of Fires 
                                                           
1 JDP 0-01 British Defence Doctrine (BDD) (4th Edition). 
2 An adaptation of work by Dr Karl Mueller and others, including Robert Pape, Daniel Byman, Matthew Waxman and 
Jeremy Shapiro.  
Fires
Physical Attrition Counter Command
activity
Will Understanding
Diminish effective capability
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-2 3 rd Edition Change 1 
Strategic Communication 
3A3. Strategic Communication.  At the strategic level we seek to  achieve influence 
by using all levers of power, of which the military represents just one.3  The military 
contribution to strategic communication is defined as: advancing national interests by 
using all means of defence communication (words, images and deeds) to influence the 
attitudes and behaviours of people.4  Strategic influence may be delivered by different 
activities to realise both physical and psychological effects.5  Military information 
activities, however, are conducted at the operational and tactical levels.  They are 
primarily focused on achieving psychological effects.  They should be coherent with 
the activities of other diplomatic and economic actors. 
Information Activities 
3A4. Information Activities.  Information activities seek to achieve psychological 
effects by manipulating information, including its receipt or exchange, or perceptions 
of that information once receiv
ed.  They are focused on altering another actor’s 
understanding and, hence, indirectly, his will to (re)act and the ability to employ his 
capability effectively.  Fires, information activities and their intended effects, are not 
mutually exclusive.  Cyber activity is a good example of fires intended to impact 
directly both an opponent’s understanding and capability.6 
3A5. Types of Information Activities.  Information activities encompass a variety 
of activities and supporting functions.  Some are undertaken by a Joint 
Task Force 
(JTF) (presence, posture and profile), others by a JTFC directly (key leadership 
engagement).  Some may be under JTFC control (Information Operations (Info Ops)); 
some may simply present opportunities to shape the activities of others (Media 
Operations (Media Ops)).  They may be distinguished, and hence better understood, in 
a number of ways: 
a.      Offensive activities in cyberspace can manipulate the means by which 
information is receiv
ed.  Other activities provide, or deny, an actor access to 
information, such as key leadership engagement, Psychological Operations 
(PSYOPS) or Operations Security (OPSEC). 
b.      Other information activities, such as presence, posture and profile, may 
directly affect an actor’s will rather than his situ
ational understanding per se.  
Fires may also be used for a similar expressive purpose (to influence 
behaviour, attitudes or decisions) as well as their more obvious instrumental 
purpose (to destroy someone or something). 
                                                           
3 Political, military and economic. 
4 JDP 0-01.1 UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database, (8th Edition). 
5 For example, diplomatic engagement, military intervention or economic sanctions. 
6 Cyber activities span the spectrum from defence to offence. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-3 3 rd Edition Change 1 
c.      Activities such as deception and PSYOPS seek to alter perceptions and 
hence be
haviour.  They are different.  Falsification may be inherent in 
deception. PSYOPS are intrinsically truthful and usually attributable. 
d.      Some categories of information activities describe how or what is done, 
such as key leadership engagement and presence, posture and profile, while 
others indicate wh
y certain measures are taken, such as deception. 
3A6. Figure 3A.2 provides an illustration of how various effects may be achieved, 
both directly and indirectly, through information activities.  
A JTFC will plan 
information activities giving more or less emphasis to diminishing an opponent’s 
effectiveness by undermining his understanding or eroding his will to (re)act. 
Information Activities
Alter perceptions
(of information received)
Manipulate information
receipt/exchange
Will Understanding
Dimish effective use of capability  
Figure 3A.2 – Potential Effects of Information Activities 
3A7. Categorisation.  The discrete categorisation of activities is less im portant than 
the inter-relationships between them, their intended target audience(s) and the desired 
effects sought.  However, to provide a framework within which to understand 
information activities, they are brought together under the sub-headings of Info Ops, 
Media Ops, Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) and OPSEC.  This structure is 
represented at Figure 3A.3.  It recognises the contribution of each to psychological 
effects, the need for close coordination and synchronisation, and thus, unified 
command.  But, it also acknowledges the requirement for a degree of presentational 
separation. 
 
 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-4 3 rd Edition Change 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3A.3 – Information Activities Structure 
3A8. Information Operations.  Info Ops, and supporting staff, provide a 
coordinating function for information activities and related capabilities, over which the 
commander has control.  
They include: 
a.      Psychological Operations.  PSYOPS are planned, culturally sensitive 
activities directed at approved target audiences within the Joint Operations 
Area (JOA) to influence beha
viours and attitudes.  They will normally be 
truthful and attributable in order to achieve political and military objectives.  
b.      Deception.  Deception involves deliberate me asures to manipulate the 
perceptions and condition the behaviour of an opponent, in order to achieve 
and exploit an advantage.  The aim of deception is to persuade an opponent to 
adopt a course of action that disadvantages him.  The rationale for deception is 
Fires Information Activities Outreach Manoeuvre
Media Operations
Information Operations
CIMIC OPSEC
Public
Relations
Public
Information Liaison Operations
PSYOPS Deception Key Leadership
Engagement
Special Capabilities
Related Activities
Physical Destruction Cyber ActivityPresence
Posture
Profile
Joint Action
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-5 3 rd Edition Change 1 
not simply to fool an opponent but to further exploit the anticipated change in 
his perceptions or behaviour. 
c.      Key Leader Engagement.  The ability of a JTFC (and other senior 
commanders) to influence neutral, friendly and hostile actors through key 
leadership engagement may be signi
ficant.  Key leadership engagement, while 
time-consuming and not always immediately effective, often merits 
considerable effort and long-term investment.  It may, on occasion, be a 
JTFC’s personal main effort. 
d.      Special Capabilities.  Special capabilities include both UK and 4-Eyes7 
capabilities, and the development of mission-specific capabilities (activity 
specific collaboration).  A nominated officer, able to brief the JTFC and co-
ordinate activity, is required to closely control these capabilities.  
3A9. Media Operations.  The aim of Media Ops is: to pr ovide factual information 
to a number of audiences via the media to support the aims of the UK Information 
Strategy.8  Critically, its main effort is to communicate the principal themes and 
messages to the appropriate audiences in pursuit of the desired effect, while remaining 
sensitive to media interests.  Media Ops ensure timely, accurate and effective 
provision of public information and implementation of public relations policy within 
an operational environment.  Though focused primarily on maintaining public and 
political support, they influence a far wider audience including allies, other partners, 
neutrals and opponents.  The media environment represents a critical conduit for the 
delivery of psychological effect; the JTFC should exploit it.  In conjunction with Info 
Ops, CIMIC, outreach and OPSEC, the JTFC should incorporate Media Ops into all 
aspects of planning and execution.  However, while the JTFC can shape the media, he 
cannot control it.  He needs to be careful not to undermine the underpinning principles 
of Media Ops and with it the confidence of media agencies.9  The structural distinction 
between Info Ops, CIMIC, outreach, OPSEC and Media Ops provides reassurance of 
the necessary separation between each area. 
3A10. Civil-Military Cooperation.  CIMIC represents the operational and tactical 
level application of an integrated appro
ach, which recognises the need for unified 
multi-agency effort to achieve agreed outcomes.  It should be an integral part of 
planning from the outset.  The CIMIC function allows the JTFC to shape the operating 
space to the mutual benefit of both the military and civil agencies, through effective, 
regular interaction.  There are 2 key types of CIMIC activity: 
a.      Civil-Military Liaison.  Civil-military liaison provides the necessary 
interaction to support the planning and conduct of coherent activity.   
                                                           
7 4 Eyes: US, UK, Canada and Australia with New Zealand as an affiliate member. 
8 JDP 3-45.1 Media Operations. 
9 The principles of Media Ops are articulated in full within JDP 3-45.1. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-6 3 rd Edition Change 1 
b.      Civil-Military Operations.  Civil-military operations may be 
undertaken using JTF resources alone, or in com
bination with civil resources.  
Such operations will benefit from the specialist advice and coordination 
provided by civil-military liaison. 
3A11. Outreach.  Outreach activities encom pass a number of actions normally 
associated with stabilisation, such as:  
 security sector reform;  
 infrastructure; or,  
 governance projects. 
 
Some will involve elements of other information activities such as key leadership 
engagement and CIMIC, but all offer opportunities for delivering a coordinated 
message and must be integrated with the wider information strategy. 
 
3A12. Operations Security.  OPSEC is the discipline which gives a military 
operation or exercise an appropriate level of security, using active or passive means, to 
deny a tar
get decision-maker knowledge of essential elements of friendly 
information.10  The denial of essential elements of friendly information11 will impact 
directly upon an actor’s understanding and thus, indirectly, his ability or will to (re)act.  
Any lack of situational understanding will also affect an actor’s effective use of 
capability, increasing vulnerability to friendly force activities and further undermining 
will, while also protecting the JTF.  Though the psychological effects of OPSEC may 
be decisive in their own right, a lack of understanding may be exploited using the full 
range of activities to realise both physical and psychological effects.  OPSEC is a risk 
management process that addresses the additional protection demanded beyond the 
scope of standing security measures.  It focuses on protecting critical exploitable 
information to reduce risk, without overly constraining freedom of action.  Owned by 
the J3 branch, OPSEC underpins information activities and should be considered 
throughout the planning and execution process. 
3A13. Related Activities. 
a.      Cyber Contribution to Information Operations.  Cyber activities 
provide a capability to access d
igital networks to either disrupt, deny, degrade 
or destroy their capability, or alternatively to intercept and use them as a 
delivery mechanism for PSYOPS products.12  The potential for computer 
                                                           
10 JDP 3-80.1 OPSEC, Deception and PSYOPS. 
11 JDP 3-80.1 describes essential elements of friendly information as items of critical exploitable information, concerning 
friendly dispositions, intentions, capabilities, morale, knowledge and potential vulnerabilities that, if compromised, could 
threaten the success of friendly forces. 
12 Products such as BLOGs, Twitter or on other social media sites. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-7 3 rd Edition Change 1 
network information operations to affect an actor’s will, capability or 
understanding will be subject to an actor’s dependence on these systems. 
b.      Presence, Posture, Profile.  The presence, posture and profile of a JTF 
impacts on neutral and friendly actors, as well as opponents.  A fine balance 
between aggressive, or antagonistic and disciplined low-key behaviour, may  
serve to weaken or strengthen, cam
paign authority, as well as undermining the 
will and understanding of an opponent.  Presence, posture and profile are an 
integral part of influence and should be used to portray the JTF as a credible, 
committed force with a clear intent. 
c.      Physical Destruction.  See paragraph 3A2. 
3A14. Cultural Understanding.  Security and stabilisation experience has 
underlined the requirement to develop a nuanced understanding of host nation and 
regional culture.  It includes the range of actors, and the influences upon them
.  This 
understanding will shape the ways of the campaign to realise effects – both physical 
and psychological.  Cultural understanding enables the commander to optimise Joint 
Action and ensure that the most appropriate mix of fires, manoeuvre, outreach and 
information activities is applied in order to extend campaign authority. 
3A15. Coordination and Synchronisation of Information Activities. 
a. Strategic Level.  The Information Strategy including the strategic 
narrative provides a single coherent strategy to which all aspects of 
governme
nt must work.13  It articulates policy and the desired outcome, which 
is then translated into government activity, using all instruments of power.  It 
encompasses both the management of information (in the form of themes and 
messages) and the specific actions to be conducted with the intention of 
promoting a desired message.  Strategic communication staff within Targeting 
and Information Operations (TIO) supported by Defence Media and 
Communications staff, formulate the MOD’s contribution to the Information 
Strategy.  This is reflected in the Strategic Communication Effects Action 
Plan, containing influence themes, objectives and identifying the target 
audiences, which is in turn embodied within the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS’) 
Directive.  The latter will include the strategic, or operational, narrative 
together with the desired information effect the campaign seeks to achieve.14 
b. Operational Level.  At the operational level, Chief of Joint Operations 
will issue a directive, the main body of which will have detail of the 
information strategy including the narrative, desired effects in te
rms of 
                                                           
13 Coordinated information output of all government activity, undertaken to influence approved audiences in support of 
policy objectives.  JDP 3-45.1 Media Operations. 
14 JDN 1/11 Strategic Communication: The Defence Contribution, describes the information effect as the resultant 
attitudes and behaviours of audiences produced by the combination of words, images and actions. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3A-8 3 rd Edition Change 1 
behaviour as well as key themes and messages.  This will be amplified in the 
targeting directive which includes Info Ops and Media Ops which the JTFC, in 
conjunction with CIMIC, outreach and OPSEC, must fuse into a coherent and 
mutually supporting approach.  There should be synergy between all aspects of 
information activities.  Care is required to avoid giving the impression that the 
media is being manipulated by the military.  Delineation between Info Ops, 
CIMIC, outreach, OPSEC and Media Ops is required.  The responsibility for 
the coordination and synchronisation of information activities within a JFHQ 
normally falls to the Operations Support Branch.  This organisation brings 
unity of effort to information activities.  SO1 J3 Operations Support ensures 
that they are properly represented at the Joint Coordination Board and across 
all aspects of mainstream execution and planning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-1 3rd Edition Change 1 
ANNEX 3B – JOINT ACTION TARGETING PROCESS 
3B1. This Annex explains the targeting process within Joint Action.  This is the 
principal catalyst for the close coordination and synchroni
sation of fires and 
information activities with manoeuvre and outreach.1 
3B2. Targeting is the process of selecting targets2 and matching the appropriate 
response to them, taking account of operational requirements and capabilities.3  Joint 
Action requires focussed and prioritised targeting to coordinate and synchronise the 
full range of the Joint Force’s capabilities to cohere with the themes and messages 
articulated in the information strategy and derived from the strategic narrative.  The 
targeting process will have a substantial impact on campaign rhythm and it requires 
the personal interest of the Joint Task Force Commander (JTFC). 
3B3. Full Spectrum Targeting.  Full spectrum targeting is defined as: a holist ic 
approach to targeting reviewing all targets together and apportioning action (lethal 
and non-lethal) in accordance with the campaign information strategy and desired 
behavioural objectives.4  The targeting process starts with a target systems analysis 
which examines potential target audiences and networks analysing behaviours, 
attitudes, perceptions and vulnerabilities to identify how they may be influenced and 
what effects, either physical or psychological, could achieve that influence.  This 
allows identification of behavioural objectives, the effects that will be required to 
achieve them and the activities and resources required to deliver those effects.  All 
activity, whether lethal or non-lethal, must be conducted within the bounds of 
necessity, humanity, distinction and proportionality.  Targeting of individuals and 
particular groups to achieve psychological effects will often be sensitive and require 
levels of delegated authority in the same manner as lethal targeting.  
Principles of Lawful Targeting 
3B4. Successful targeting should ensure that all activity is focused on achieving the 
desired influence on the target in support of the cam
paign end-state.  The targeting 
process is bounded by international law and UK domestic law.  Only members of the 
armed forces may lawfully take part in hostilities.  Wherever they serve, UK Service 
                                           
1 The UK Joint Service Publication (JSP) 900 UK Joint Targeting Policy, 2009 provides policy guidance. 
2 A target is any structure, object, person, organisation, mindset, thought process, attitude or behaviour which can be 
influenced by a weapon. JSP 900, dated 2009. 
3 Allied Administrative Publication (AAP-6) NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions.  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-
3.9 Allied Joint Doctrine for Joint Targeting, dated May 2008, defines joint targeting as: the process of determining the 
effects necessary to achieve the commander’s objectives, identifying the actions necessary to create the desired effects 
based on means available, selecting and prioritising targets, and the synchronisation of fires with other military 
capabilities and then assessing their cumulative effectiveness and taking remedial action if necessary.  This definition 
ascribes to joint targeting an extremely broad remit that, for the UK at least, would only be accurate if preceded by an 
expression such as in relation to planned supporting effects and activities – for it is through planning that the requisite 
effects and actions are identified.   
4 New definition. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-2 3rd Edition Change 1 
personnel remain subject to Service discipline and, through the Armed Forces Act 
2006, the Criminal Law of England and Wales.   
3B5. Law of Armed Conflict.  The Law of Armed Conf lict is based on customary 
law, the principles of humanity, and international conventions, treaties and agreements. 
To ensure that obligations under the Law of Armed Conflict are met, appropriate 
training is to be given to military commanders and Service personnel who should be 
supported by a Legal Adviser (LEGAD) at the appropriate level.  Additional Protocol I 
of 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 gives direction as to targeting and can be 
regarded as a primary source. The 4 fundamental principles which underpin the law of 
armed conflict are: 
a. Military Necessity.  Military necessity permits a state engaged in an 
armed conflict to use only that degree and kind of force, not otherwise 
prohibited by the law of armed conflict, that is required to achieve the 
legitimate purpose of the conflict, namely the complete or partial submission 
of the enemy at the earliest moment with the minimum expenditure of life and 
resources. 
b. Humanity.  The concept of humanity forbids the infliction of suffering, 
injury or destruction not necessary for the accomplishment of legitimate 
military purposes.  Once a military purpose has been achieved, further 
infliction of suffering is unnecessary.  
c. Distinction.  Offensive action must be directed against military 
objectives and combatants only, making a clear distinction between them and 
civilian objects and civilians.  Military objectives are objects, which by their 
nature, location, purpose or use make an effective contribution to military 
action and whose total or partial destruction, capture or neutralisation, in the 
circumstances ruling at the time, offers definite military advantage.  All 
feasible precautions are to be taken in the choice and methods of attack with a 
view to avoiding, or at least minimising, incidental loss of civilian life, injury 
to civilians and damage to civilian objects.  Particular care must be taken when 
considering sites of religious or cultural significance and specially protected 
objects.  The word feasible means that which is practicable, or practically 
possible, taking into account all of the circumstances ruling at the time, 
including humanitarian and military considerations.  Indiscriminate attacks are 
those that are not directed at specific military objectives, those that employ a 
method or means of combat that cannot be directed at a specific military 
objective and those that employ a method or means of combat the effects of 
which cannot be limited.  Consequently, indiscriminate attacks are those that 
strike military objectives and civilians, or civilian objects, without distinction.  
Indiscriminate attacks are prohibited.  A disproportionate attack is also 
considered to be indiscriminate. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-3 3rd Edition Change 1 
d. Proportionality.  An attack will be disproportionate if it is expected to 
cause incidental loss of civilian life, injury to civilians, damage to civilian 
objects, or a combination thereof, which would be excessive in relation to the 
concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.  The military advantage 
anticipated refers to the advantage from the attack considered as a whole, and 
not only from isolated, or particular parts, of the attack. 
3B6. Self-Defence.  Self-defence is an inherent right in the law of England and 
W
ales, both in Common Law and in Statute.  It allows for a person to use such force as 
is reasonable in the circumstances as he honestly believes them to be, in the defence of 
himself, or of another, against attack.  As well as being reasonable, the use of force 
must be necessary.  Lethal force may only be used in self-defence as a last resort, 
where there is an honest belief of an imminent threat to life, and there is no other way 
to prevent that threat. 
3B7. Other Law.  The wide utility of information activities extends the need for 
legal conform
ity beyond the Law of Armed Conflict.  The virtual domain is pervasive, 
with few clear boundaries of identity, ownership and attribution.  Information 
activities may impact third parties not involved in the crisis and those outside the Joint 
Operations Area (JOA).  Additionally, it may be desirable to commence information 
activities before the deployment of UK forces.  There should be careful scrutiny of 
information activities to ensure compliance with all applicable law, both international 
and domestic. 
3B8. Prevention of Collateral Damage.  Collateral damage is defined as: damage 
to personnel and property adjacent to, but not forming part of, an authorised tar
get.5 
Potential for civilian casualties and unintended consequences6 should be mitigated or 
eliminated by use of particular measures such as precision guided munitions, timing of 
the attack and Collateral Damage Estimation (CDE).7  Intensive intelligence effort 
must be applied to identify civilians or civilian structures in the vicinity of weapon aim 
points as well as those whose functionality could be impaired by loss of support 
services, such as hospital power supplies.  
Role of the Targeting and Information Operations 8 
3B9. Strategic Communication.  The National Security Council will establish a 
comm
unications team for a particular crisis who will articulate the Information 
Strategy including the Strategic Narrative.  Coordination with other government 
                                           
5 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1 UK Glossary of Joint and Multinational Terms and Definitions.  
6 For example, disruption of hospital power supplies. 
7 Collateral Damage Estimation (CDE) can be conducted using collateral damage modelling tools or as field CDE by a 
pilot or authorised observer. 
8 Targeting and Information Operations (TIO) contains a Strategic Communication planning element that seeks  to 
integrate all words, images and actions to achieve information effect.  
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-4 3rd Edition Change 1 
departments is achieved through pan-departmental strategic communication steering 
and working group meetings as required. 
3B10. MOD Targeting and Information Operations (TIO) is responsible for 
integrating strategic fires and inform
ation activities’ policies towards achieving Joint 
Action within the information strategy.  The role of TIO is to: 
a. Provide specialist milita ry advice to Ministers. 
b. Provide target systems.  
c. Develop and review the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS’) Targeting 
Directive in consultation with Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) for 
specific operations.  The Targeting Directive contains detail of physical and 
psychological objectives that have been developed in the Strategic 
Communication Actions and Effects Plan.  
d. Coordinate strategic input to operational information activities and 
monitor implementation of strategic guidance for information activities. 
e. Develop and review MOD rules of  engagement profiles in conjunction 
with MOD Central Legal Services and PJHQ. 
f. Manage the process of Ministerial cl earance for specific targeting of fires 
and information activities. 
g. Coordinate Defence Intelligence support to campaign effectiveness 
assessment. 
3B11. Target Support and Information Operations Products.  On receipt of a 
Defence Engageme
nt Board Directive and strategic guidance, TIO will produce a 
target systems analysis for the area of interest.  This in-depth analysis of the physical 
and human terrain attempts to expose vulnerabilities which, when targeted correctly, 
should contribute to the realisation of desired campaign objectives.  
a. TIO strategic communication staff in  conjunction with staff from Defence 
Media and Communications (DMC), will develop a Strategic Communications 
Actions and Effects Plan to ensure coherence of MOD words, images and 
actions from which a strategic communications synchronisation matrix is 
developed.   
b. Fires and Information Activities.  The Master Target List is generated 
by TIO.  Targets whose deliberate, or inadvertent, damage would be sensitive 
for legal, political or cultural reasons are placed on a No Strike List.  The 
remaining targets are consigned to the Joint Target List, which is grouped into 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-5 3rd Edition Change 1 
target categories for validation.9  Individual target sets may be identified by 
authorised Ministers for further analysis by Defence Intelligence and 
ultimately prosecution by strategic assets.  Ministerially-approved target sets, 
delegated authority, supporting rules of engagement and amplification of 
targeting methodologies are issued to the Chief of Joint Operations (CJO) via 
the TIO Targeting Directive and Rules of Engagement Profile.  This is 
attached to CDS’ overarching directive for the campaign. 
3B12. Execution.  During the conduct of an operation, TIO ma y receive target 
clearance requests from PJHQ that fall outside PJHQ’s delegated authority.10  PJHQ 
Targets staff will prepare a target pack for CJO together with a Target Summary Sheet 
(TSS), which is then passed to TIO and used in the staffing process to gain Ministerial 
approval and as a legal record of decisions.  Unless delegated to commanders, 
Ministerial approval is also required before the employment of cyber operations or 
special capabilities. 
3B13. J3 Operations Planning.  CDS’s Directiv e contains a TIO Targeting Directive 
incorporating an Information Operations annex. This forms the basis of the targeting 
and information annex to CJO’s Directive.  Additional decisive conditions and 
supporting effects coherent with the information strategy may be added as the 
operational plan develops.  J3 Joint Effects staff take the campaign objectives and 
define desired effects and associated targeting priorities. From this they will refine the 
given target audiences and distil the overall strategic themes into specific military 
messages all nested and coherent with the strategic narrative.  Information activities 
risks should be identified, while considering capability and resource requirements.   
3B14. The full spectrum targeting process is coordinated by J3 Joint Effects.  Once 
behavioural objectives are identified, detailed T
arget Audience Analysis (TAA) is 
conducted to specify which approach (lethal or non-lethal) is most likely to achieve 
the desired effect.  TAA is not simply cultural understanding, although this provides a 
start-point.  It requires a thorough analysis of the motivations and internal dynamics of 
particular groups supported by hard statistical data.  The process depicted 
diagrammatically in Figure 3B.111 is as follows: 
a. Determine the desired beha viour of target audiences. 
b. Analyse the targets to identif y critical vulnerabilities and levers. 
                                           
9 Target categories are grouped by function.  An extract from the Modernised Integrated Database will contain fixed 
targets only.  Individuals, groups or mobile targets may appear as a target set but will not have complete information 
included in the Joint Target List. 
10 This usually refers to delegated casualty threshold authority but may encompass the use of specific weapons or 
requirement to prosecute targets on the Restricted Target List (lawful targets that are temporarily or permanently 
restricted from engagement). 
11 Developed from a model designed by Dr Lee Rowland. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-6 3rd Edition Change 1 
c. Decide on the best type of activ ity to achieve the desired effect. 
d. Execute the activity either as Info rmation or Outreach, or as Fires or 
Manoeuvre. 
e. Monitor the audience and the environment to measure any change in 
behaviour or move towards the original behavioural objective. 
Behavioural Objectives and
Measures of Effectiveness
Behavioural - Target Audience Analysis
Lethal
Fires/Manoeuvre
Non-lethal
Information Activities/Outreach
Effect
Behavioural Influence
Audience Based Measures of Effectiveness
Determine
Analyse
Decide/Direct
Conduct
Activity
Outcome
Achieving
Performance
Assessment  
Figure 3B.1 – Audience-based Effects Process 
3B15. Figure 3B.2 illustrates a similar process or Full Spectrum Targeting Cycle 
which is aligned with the traditional Joint Targeting Cycle.12  Following direction on 
targeting priorities, J2 develops understanding of target sets using collection assets 
including Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR), information from the 
                                           
12 Commander’s direction, target development, capability matching, force planning and assignment, execution, 
assessment.  AJP 3.9 Allied Joint Doctrine for Targeting. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-7 3rd Edition Change 1 
host nation and allies, as well as engagement with local and regional actors.  As 
understanding improves, target sets are refined, enabling vulnerabilities and levers to 
be identified indicating which capabilities are likely to achieve the desired behavioural 
effect.  This could be a lethal or non-lethal approach or a combination of both.  Most 
activity will be coordinated at component level using a 4-stage tactical targeting 
process of: Decide, Detect, Deliver, Assess (D3A).  Assessment is a phase in both the 
tactical and operational cycles and is critical in determining opportunities to exploit 
and to contribute to the overall campaign assessment process.  Subordinate units and 
headquarters may use a further mechanism known as: Find, Fix, Finish, Exploit, 
Analyse (F3EA).13  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3B.2 - Joint Effects Cycle 
Targeting 
3B16. Plans for activities against specific target sets will be produced as Full 
Spectrum T
argeting Plans, detailing the range of activities both lethal and non-lethal to 
be conducted.  An example is at Figure 3B.3. 
                                           
13 See JDP 3-05 Special Forces Operations and Land Forces Doctrine Note 10-15 Land Force Tactical Targeting 
Process. 
Execution Understand
Capability
Matching
Target
Development
Intelligence
Surveillance
Reconnaissance
Key Leadership
Engagement
Host Nation
Agencies
J2
CIMIC
Media
Special
Capabilities
PSYOPS
Deception
Presence
Posture
Profile
Engagement
Non
Lethal
Targeting
Cycle
Chief of Staff
Assess
Deliver
Lethal and Non-lethal
activities Integrated and
Synchronised
Non-lethal
Decide
Detect
Component
Activity
Lethal
Targeting
Cycle
Assess
Decide
Detect
Deliver
Assess
Find/Feel
Target
Development
Execution
Lethal
Command
Direction
Decide
Force
Planning and
Assignment
Electronic
Warfare
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-8 3rd Edition Change 1 
Figure 3B.3 – Full Spectrum Targeting Plan 
 
3B17. Fires.  Targeting is a collaborative process between targ eting staff in the 
deployed JFHQ and PJHQ.  JFHQ submit the Joint Target List (JTL) and a copy of the 
No Strike List (NSL) to PJHQ.  MOD retains control of the NSL and must authorise 
any amendments.  This collaborative approach makes efficient use of staff and 
improves target knowledge between the 2 headquarters.  Certain targets on the JTL, 
although valid military targets, may have an adverse effect on the campaign plan and 
can be placed on the Restricted Target List (RTL).  The JTL and RTL are approved by 
PJHQ before being issued to JFHQ.  Once issued, the JTL and RTL are controlled by 
JFHQ.  Details of each target will be contained within a target folder, which provides 
an audit trail to determine whether a target is a valid military objective and can be 
cleared for attack.  CJO will issue a targeting directive to JFHQ, delegating authority 
within his chain of command and providing any amplifying guidance. 
3B18. Execution.  Following the issue of CJO’s Directive to JTFC, the Joint Ef fects 
Branch maintains close contact with JFHQ Operations Support (Ops Sp) staff to 
ensure that information activities’ issues are staffed through the appropriate 
Contingency Planning Team or Operations Team.  The Branch also conducts liaison 
with coalition partners, as well as maintaining resource balance through contact with 
                                           
14 TLAM: Tomahawk Land – Attack Missile. 
Full Spectrum Targeting Plan
Effect 
Regime C2 disrupted 
Target Set 
Cognitive           General population – regime cannot maintain control 
Military              Abandon the regime or face consequences 
Physical              C2 Infrastructure 
 
 
D – 4 May 2011 
  
Asset Target Effect 
GR4 
TLAM14 
COMMANDO 
SOLO 
PSE 
Lethal strike on command bunker at: 
Lethal strike on radio mast at: 
Radio broadcast 
 
Leaflet drop around C2 bunker and radio mast 
Destroy 
Destroy 
Persuade 
Deter 
Timeline
-24 -12 D +12 +24
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-9 3rd Edition Change 1 
PJHQ J1, the service commands and the Operations Directorate in MOD.  During the 
conduct of the operation, PJHQ may run a Target Coordination Board (TCB) to 
approve targets within CJO’s delegated authority (or staff those outside CJO’s 
delegated authority, through TIO, for Ministerial approval).  The branch also assists 
with the passage of information for measures of effectiveness and campaign 
effectiveness assessment. 
Role of Joint Task Force Headquarters 
3B19. JFHQ staff will translate the direction and intent of the JTFC into synchronised 
activities that the components will conduct to achieve his intent.  The headquarters’
 
battle rhythm will consist of a series of meetings and working groups, orchestrated by 
the COS.  The output will be a Joint Action synchronisation matrix to track and 
monitor all elements of Joint Action.  An example is at Figure 3B.4.  Details of these 
meetings are given in Annex A to Chapter 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3B.4 – The Joint Action Synchronisation Matrix 
Radio Broadcast
Key Strategic Dates
Information
Activities
Fires & Manoeuvre
JFSFC
JFMC
JFLC
JFAC
JFLogC
Outreach
Inter-Agency
Engage with regional leaders
JFTC Press Conference
Shaping Operations
Deploy                                    D                                        D+20                                 D+40
Blockade port at X
Support and Influence
Interdict X Naval Forces
Conduct SEAD Interdict C2 targets
Activate SPOD Conduct inload
Conduct Training Conduct Raid
Key
JFSFC - Joint Force Special Forces Component
JFMC - Joint Force Maritime Component
JFLC - Joint Force Land Component
JFAC - Joint Force Air Component
JFLogC - Joint Force Logistic Component
SEAD - Suppression of Enemy Air Defences
UN SC Mtg - United Nations Security
Council Meeting
Independence Day
Country X
Start of
Ramadan UN SC Mtg
Provide military
training to Y forces
Provide initial support
to governance for Y
Regional Diplomacy continues Inload of Aid stocks
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-10 3rd Edition Change 1 
3B20. The Air Tasking Order.  JFHQ sets the battle rhythm across the joint force, 
one element of which is the Air 
Tasking Order (ATO).  The ATO cycle normally 
allows two thirds of available time for planning and one third for execution on a 
rolling basis; typically over a 72 hour period.  Adherence to this cycle makes the most 
efficient use of resources and wherever possible targets allocated to the Air 
Component (both lethal and non-lethal) should comply with this rhythm.  The ATO 
cycle is inherently flexible and can facilitate targeting inputs at every stage.   
 
Full Spectrum Targeting15 
1. As part of a wider operation designe d to protect the civilian population from 
attack and the threat of attack by an oppressive regime within a designated country a 
specific operation has been developed which seeks to: 
Target key capabilities and symbolic structures of oppression, across the range of 
effects, in order to protect the population of the Capital City from attack and the 
threat of attack. 
2. The aims of the operation are to: 
 Disrupt, degrade, deter and deny the oppressive capabilities of the ruling 
regime 
 Reassure civilians that the UK is resolute in protecting them from further 
attack and human rights abuses 
 Reassure civilians that their future is secure  
3. The operation has been developed and planned using the principles of Full 
Spectrum Targeting, which is illustrated by the matrix below.  Note that some effects 
may be delivered by less than lethal means such as Computer Network Operations 
(CNO). 
 
Full Spectrum Targeting Matrix over page. 
 
 
                                           
15 This example is based on a Full Spectrum Targeting Plan developed during a real operation; it is included for 
illustrative purposes to show examples of capabilities, effects and target sets that may be used during this process and 
should not be considered a rigid template. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-11 3rd Edition Change 1  
 
Attack
Helicopter
Computer
Networks
Operations
Air
COMMANDO
SOLO
and
Offshore
Radio
Media
Operations/
Public Affairs
Officer
Free State
Radio
Electronic
Warfare
Image
Intelligence
Find
Find
Targets
Undermine/
Warn
militias and
mercenaries acting
for regime
Reassure
civilian population
of UK’s resolve to
protect them by
informing them
what/why we have
struck
Discourage
informing
Strike
militias and
mercenaries and
internal security
forces
Strike
CCTV and
Sat TV
uplinks to
protect
civilian
population
from threat
of attack
Inform
civilian
population
across the
country, and
especially
the capital of
strikes’
against the
military
Strike
capital city
tools of
oppression
(checks
points, internal
security, HQs,
etc) to protect
civilian
population
from attack,
and threat of
attack
Inform/
Reassure
civilian
population
following
attacks on
CCTV and SAT
TV uplinks
Image
intelligence
Battle
Damage
Assessment
Reassure
civilian
population of
UK’s resolve to
protect them by
informing them
what/why we
have struck the
Capital City
Reassure
civilians on
the future to
ensure stability
post-conflict
Strike
military targets to
demonstrate
UK’s resolve to
protect the
civilian
population
Undermine/
warn
militias and
mercenaries ‘we
will strike again’
Find Shape/Fix Mitigate/ExploitStrike
2 Days
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 3B-12 3rd Edition Change 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-1 3rd Edition Change 1 
CHAPTER 4 – CAMPAIGN MANAGEMENT 
Chapter 4 describes some of the mechanisms and considerations by which the Joint 
Force Headquarters (JFHQ) integrates, coordinates and prioritises the activities 
executed by the components to achieve the campaign end-state. 
Section I – Command Factors 
Section II – Campaign Rhythm 
Section III – Consequence Management and Adaptation 
Section IV – Information Superiority   
401. Balancing the effect of each activity against its impact on achie ving the 
information effect, and ultimately the campaign objective, the risks that it entails and 
the resources required for it, is complex and requires a variety of control mechanisms.  
Campaign management integrates, coordinates, synchronises and prioritises the 
execution of operations and assesses progress.  Campaign management is enabled by 
campaign rhythm which regulates and maintains control of a campaign through a  
regular recurring sequence of events and actions, harmonised across a Joint Task Force 
(JTF).1  Campaign management ensures that all the activities contributing to Joint 
Action conducted by all elements of a JTF are coherent and in concert with other non-
military actors.   
402. The combination of coordination, synchronisation and prioritisation is the basis 
for overall orchestration of a JTF
, providing the ‘who, what, when and where’ of 
military activity throughout the Joint Operations Area (JOA). 
a.      Prioritisation.  Coordination and synchronisation highlight comp eting 
demands for time, space and finite resources; prioritisation determines their 
allocation, in accordance with the Joint Task Force Commander’s (JTFC) 
Concept of Operations (CONOPS).  As circumstances change, a JTFC should 
review priorities to ensure that risks are analysed and managed appropriately, 
and that opportunities are exploited as they arise. 
b.      Coordination.  Coordination is the process by which different JTF 
capabilities and activities are co
mbined into an efficient and effective 
relationship.  Complementary aspects are united to promote mutual support, 
while incompatible aspects are de-conflicted to preserve and make best use of 
available capabilities. 
c.      Synchronisation.  Coordination is enhanced through synchronisation, 
which sequ
ences activities at appropriate tempo.  The dependency between 
                                           
1 JDP 01 Campaigning (2nd Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-2 3rd Edition Change 1 
events, and the availability of resources, determines the degree of concurrent, 
sequential or independent activity. 
Coordination, Synchronisation and Prioritisation - Operation JUST CAUSE 
In the early hours of 20 December 1989, JTF Panama conducted multiple, 
simultaneous forced entry operations to begin Operation JUST CAUSE.   Parachute 
assaults seized key lodgements, which were then used to build up forces and launch 
immediate assaults against the Panamanian Defence Force.  The JTFC synchronised 
forced entry with numerous other operations involving virtually all JTF capabilities.  
The parachute assault strategically deployed at staggered times from US bases.  One 
formation experienced delays due to a sudden ice storm – its operations and timings 
were revised in the air.  H-hour was even adjusted for the assault because of 
intelligence that indicated a possible compromise.  SF recce and direct action teams 
provided last-minute information on widely dispersed targets.   
The forced entry, combined with simultaneous and follow-on attack against enemy C2 
facilities and key units, seized the initiative and paralysed enemy decision-making. 
US Joint Publication 3-0 Joint Operations, 17 September 2006
403. Campaign management has 2 interrelated facets:  
 the implementation of plans and orders; and  
 the anticipation of future activities based on current and predicted 
progress.  
 
A significant amount of the JTFC’s and his staff’s time will be taken up with external 
engagements, including interaction with superior headquarters and other agencies.  
The JFHQ should at all times retain the capacity to respond, at short notice, to 
unforeseen events or a change in the political landscape that necessitates a review of 
operating procedures or current tactics.   
SECTION I – COMMAND FACTORS 
404. The JTFC will prioritise and improve campaign management efficiency by 
delegation of responsibility; his principle tools are his CONOPS and m
ission 
command:  
a.      Concept of Operations.  The CONOPS, or theory of change, represents 
the essence of the JTFC’s plan.  The CONOPS communicate to staff and 
tactical co
mmanders what the force is to do and why.  The CONOPS ensure 
that their actions are executed in the right context nested within the overall 
strategic narrative, as well as when, where, who and how.  The CONOPS 
should include intent, scheme of manoeuvre and main effort and is described 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-3 3rd Edition Change 1 
further in JDP 5-00 Campaign Planning (2nd Edition).  In articulating his 
vision the JTFC also indicates to his subordinates the likely nature and scope 
of subsequent orders and plans. 
b.      Mission Command.  The JTFC seeks to ensure that his tactical  
commanders are given appropriate freedom to act.  The JTFC’s direction 
includes, as a minimum, a clear statement on how he sees the operation 
unfolding and its context within the narrative along with key campaign themes.  
The JTFC also identifies those operational-level decisions which rest on his 
shoulders, while offering necessary latitude to his subordinates.  Thereafter, he 
expects tactical commanders to determine their implied tasks and keep him, 
and each other, informed of progress or risks.  The JTFC will use this feedback 
to inform his operational level decisions including resource apportionment.   
Mission Command – Von Moltke’s Approach 
As Chief of the Prussian (and then German) General Staff Von Moltke promulgated 
the concept of Auftragstaktik (or mission tactics), which stressed the need for initiative 
and decentralised decision-making within an overall strategic design.  He understood 
that as an operation progressed its uncertainties diminished the value of initial 
planning and that commanders had to make decisions based on a fluid, constantly 
evolving situation – ‘no plan of operations extends with any degree of certainty 
beyond the first encounter with the main enemy force.’  Auftragstaktik encouraged 
commanders to be agile and react immediately to changes in the situation as they 
developed.  It replaced detailed planning with delegation of decision-making authority 
to subordinate commanders within the context of the higher commander’s intent.  He 
took great care to encourage initiative by commanders at all levels, only issuing the 
most essential orders, which provided the principal objective and specific missions: 
tactical details were left to subordinates.  For Moltke, ‘the advantage which a 
commander thinks he can attain through continued personal intervention is largely 
illusory.  By engaging in it he assumes a task that really belongs to others, whose 
effectiveness he thus destroys.  He also multiplies his own tasks to a point where he 
can no longer fulfill the whole of them.’  
 
c.      Befehlstaktik.  While mission command should be the norm , under 
exceptional circumstances, the JTFC may have to take charge of the tactical 
situation and issue direct orders with clear detail as to how they are carried out.  
This approach or Befehlstaktik should be used sparingly, and only where 
fleeting opportunities for decisive exploitation or risks of failure present 
themselves. 
405. To provide the JTFC with a broader or alternative perspective of the cam paign 
he may augment his formal decision-making process with a variety of command 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-4 3rd Edition Change 1 
groupings, ad hoc forums or support from key individuals.  The use of senior ex-
military mentors is increasingly commonplace, as is the employment of ex-military 
and civilian cultural, development, governance, academic, media and other advisers, 
either in theatre or through reachout.  These may be brought together in a 
commander’s consultation, initiative or ‘Prism’ Group.2 
SECTION II – CAMPAIGN RHYTHM 
406. The JTFC will ensure that his headquarters and campaign design have the 
capacity to accommod
ate multiple and concurrent demands for information, 
clarification and external engagement while maintaining routine campaign rhythm.   
407. Campaign management is supported by assessment (Chapter 5), which form s 
an integral part of the campaign rhythm; similar cycles and forums are used for both.  
The relationship between them is demonstrated in the 3 concurrent and inter-related 
JFHQ review cycles: 
a.      Activity Review.  The JFHQ manages the activity currently under 
execution to implement the JTFC’s Operation Plan (OPLAN)/Operation Order 
(OPORD).  Measurement of activity informs the process, which may require 
adjustm
ent to priorities, activities, the apportionment of assets and resources, 
or the employment of any operational reserves. 
b.      Effects Review.  Informed by the measurement of effects, progress 
towards the supporting effects articulated in the JTFC’s OPLAN/OPORD, is 
also reviewed by the JFHQ.  I
t is possible to combine effects review and 
activity review, but this is unlikely to be practical or productive and effects 
reviews should take place over more protracted timescales.  The distinct 
functions of the effects review are to generate fresh direction from the JTFC to 
component commanders to redress shortcomings or reinforce success in 
achieving supporting effects, or to respond to changes in circumstance, 
activating Contingency Plans (CONPLANs) and the issue of Fragmentary 
Orders (FRAGOs) to promulgate branches and sequels.  J3 Operations Support 
are responsible for the effects review. 
c.      Campaign Review.  In conjunction with the effects review, the JTFC  
continually reviews progress towards decisive conditions and his operational 
end-state.  This process is informed by campaign effectiveness assessment, 
which includes periodic review of the whole campaign plan.  J5 is responsible 
for the campaign review.  Depending upon the extent of assessed progress 
towards his immediate objectives (those supporting effects contained within 
                                           
2 These groups sit outside the normal headquarters structure and examine the campaign from a variety of different 
angles to introduce a wider scope of analysis, judgements and recommendations into the headquarters decision 
making process; they are particularly useful in countering groupthink.  
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-5 3rd Edition Change 1 
published OPORDs), the JTFC initiates additional planning effort, to generate 
subsequent OPLANs and OPORDs.  This process of continual, iterative 
planning is described in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 5-00 Campaign 
Planning (2nd Edition Change 1). 
408. No individual, not even the JTFC, should become indispensabl e.  The 
headquarters should be operated in shifts with some staff working on fixed shifts, 
others on extended days, or on-call when needed.  In cases when there is no dedicated 
deputy commander, the JTFC appoints another commander to oversee the operation at 
times when he is absent.  At the heart of the JFHQ’s internal regulatory mechanism are 
a series of meetings, briefings and planning groups, as well as informal and specialist 
gatherings used to coordinate activity and aid synchronisation.  Representation across 
the spectrum of meetings and briefings should encompass, where possible, the breadth 
of staff branches.  Moreover, there should be regular and coherent representation from 
other agencies.  The commander will set this battle rhythm.  The principal meetings 
are detailed at Annex 4A. 
409. The relative importance and content of each meeting will be driven by the 
type, scale and intensity of the operation.  For example, on disaster relief operations 
there is unlikely to be a requirement to cover physical destruction within a joint ef
fects 
meeting, but the weight given to Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) and information 
activities may be greater.  Consequently, the internal campaign rhythm is inherently 
flexible, allowing the Chief of Staff (COS) to decide whether the business of some 
meetings can be incorporated into others.  His aim is the efficient and effective flow of 
information to inform timely decision making; to that end, every meeting must have a 
valid output. 
410. The outputs of these forums are: 
a.      A common understanding of the situation achieved through the 
exchange of information, assessment and the application of ju
dgement. 
b.      Dealing with key issues and making operational-level decisions. 
c.      Integration, coordination, synchronisation and prioritisation of activities, 
and allocation of resources to match them. 
d.      Issuing further direction and guidance. 
e.      Focusing staff effort over the next period. 
411. Influences on Campaign Rhythm.  While principally driven  by the tempo of 
operations, campaign rhythm will also be influenced by the following factors: 
a.      Time Zones.  The campaign rhythm should balance the requirement to 
inform the strategic level campaign rhythm against the battle rhythm of the 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-6 3rd Edition Change 1 
components.  This will be especially testing on multinational operations where 
widely varying time zones, and the requirements of the lead nation’s capital, 
can cause dislocation. 
b.      National Imperatives.  To allow the MOD Defence Crisis Management 
Organisation (DCMO) to both inform
 and advise politicians, and to make 
decisions, COS JFHQ must provide timely information through Permanent 
Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).  In addition to formal Situation Reports 
(SITREPS) and assessment reports, there will be a constant stream of requests 
and points for clarification. Wherever possible, subordinated headquarters 
should be protected from these. 
c.      Political Considerations.  As military activity is subject to political 
authority, the information flow up the chain of command to politicians m
ust be 
accurate and timely.  Military networks must be responsive to real-time 24/7 
media reporting, which enables ministers to be aware of incidents before the 
formal chain of command acquires all the relevant facts (see paragraph 414). 
The nature of tactical events which provoke immediate political interest should 
be identified and promulgated to support rapid reporting. 
d.      Parallel Briefing.  In cases  where the UK is not the lead nation but has 
provided a national contingent commander, there will be a requirement to 
provide briefings to the national chain to satisfy the national and political 
considerations outlined above.  Headquarters staff and components should be 
prepared for this, but remain aware that it is an additional requirement and  
subordinate to the need to satisfy the JFHQ reports and returns requirement. 
e.      Multinational Influences.  Multinational operations add to the briefing 
requirement.  The timing of briefings to in
ternational authorities or 
organisations such as the UN, Organisation for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe, and coalition partners, will place significant demand on the JTFC’s 
personal diary, to the extent where it can become his principal activity.  The 
JTFC must guard the critical vulnerabilities that often lie along inter-
organisational fault lines. 
f.      Media.  Media deadlines, particularly those for specific morning and 
evening time slots, shoul
d be factored into the campaign rhythm.  Often the 
staffing times required either to rebut or confirm incidents will be tied to these 
deadlines. 
412. Harmonisation with Component Commanders’ Battle Rhythms.  Wh ere 
the component construct is used, their operational tempos may vary.  The Joint Force 
Air Component Commander (JFACC), for example, achieves high tempo through 
maximising sortie rate.  Since JFACC designated targets include those with strategic, 
as well as operational and tactical significance, the targeting process should include 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-7 3rd Edition Change 1 
time for political decision-making, and air operations are typically planned 48-72 
hours in advance.  The ability, therefore, of COS JFHQ to coordinate and synchronise 
component activity will have a significant impact on JTF synergy. 
413. Reports and Returns.  In addition to formal meetings and gatherings, an 
important strand of activity within the camp
aign rhythm is the production of formal 
daily reports and returns.  JTF synergy will be enhanced by a coordinated rhythm.  
SECTION III – CONSEQUENCE MANAGEMENT AND 
ADAPTATION 
414. Definition of Consequence Management.  Consequence Management is 
defined as: the pr
ocess by which a headquarters plans for, and reacts to, the 
consequences of incidents and events which have a direct physical or psychological 
effect on people.3 
In this instance, incidents refers to things that have come about as a result of what has 
been said, or done, by the task force (for example, a culturally insensitive PSYOPS 
product or collateral damage from an artillery strike).  Events are things that happen 
which are outside the task force’s control, but can have an effect on people within the 
Joint Operations Area, and lead to incidents that could impact on the mission. An 
example of the latter is Pastor Jones’s Burn the Koran Day in Florida in 2010. 
Pastor Terry Jones 
In 2010, an obscure Pastor from Florida announced that he would hold an International 
Burn the Koran Day on 11 September 2010.  This dominated the international 
headlines for many days.  Many people in the West viewed the Pastor as simply an 
eccentric, but his plan sparked indignation in Muslims worldwide and caused 
significant problems for NATO forces in Afghanistan.  In addition to the stoning of 
ISAF convoys in Kabul, serious riots erupted in the city of Qalat in Zabul province 
and there was concern that these would spread to other cities.  The commander of 
NATO forces General Petraeus, was concerned enough to make public statements and 
the wider fallout had to be managed by the remainder of the NATO force. 
415. Planning for Consequence Management.  Although unplanned and 
potentially damaging, if handled correctly, the damage to the m
ission and reputation of 
the task force, can be mitigated and opportunities to seize the initiative may be 
presented.  To achieve this, COS should establish a rapid response mechanism.  
Unexpected activities can include: 
                                           
3 New definition, based on Op HERRICK Task Force Helmand Standing Operating procedure (SOP) entitled, 
Consequence Management. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-8 3rd Edition Change 1 
a.      Significant Incidents.  Significant incidents are normally reported up 
the chain of command but, increasingly, the media drive the speed with which 
related inform
ation reaches the public domain.  The definition of a significant 
incident will vary according to the type of operation but will be detailed in the 
Force Standard Operating Instructions.  In some instances this definition is 
ameliorated as the campaign progresses, in that what is, and is not, considered 
a significant incident in the initial phases of a campaign may change as the 
campaign progresses.   
b.      Conducting Consequence Management. On notification of a 
significant incident or developi
ng event, J3 Operations Coordination (Ops 
Coord) desk, within JFHQ, task organises an incident team responsible for 
developing an understanding of what has happened, monitoring and reporting 
the event and making recommendations on actions to take.  This will be a cross 
functional team with a nominated lead and include as a minimum, a Legal 
Advisor (LEGAD), a Political Advisor (POLAD), as well as Media Operations 
(Media Ops) and Information Operations (Info Ops) staff.   Component liaison 
officers are also a key element and act as the primary conduit between the 
component headquarters and JFHQ.  Certain incidents (for example, loss of an 
aircraft, mass or civilian casualties, fratricide, chemical, biological, 
radiological and nuclear incidents, etc.) should have pre-defined incident plans, 
often referred to as Military Information Operations Action Plans (MIOAPs) 
while others are managed as they develop.  Incident plans should include an 
information plan for dealing with the media and other agencies.  These should 
be predicated on sharing truthful information as quickly as possible to avoid 
exploitation by opponents.  The incident team keeps the Ops Coord desk 
informed, and in turn, they inform PJHQ, the components and contingents. 
c.      Rebuttal.  All incidents and events generate a demand for information, 
often at Ministerial level, frequently at very short notice, and often requiring 
subsequent me
dia briefing.  In most cases, time will be critical and opponents 
will exploit gaps left by incomplete or absent media briefings from JFHQ.  
Within guidelines JFHQ media staff should seek to be first and fast with 
providing as much truthful information as is available.  This will require 
shared understanding of key audiences and messages by JFHQ, media staff in 
PJHQ (Media), the MOD and any multinational partners together with constant 
communication to ensure coherence.  In many cases it is best to engage the 
media at the tactical level with support through coherent, continuous, proactive 
and command-led media engagement drawing from the strategic narrative and 
the themes within it to build trust and mutual understanding. JTFHQ should 
consider opportunities to shape the information space through media briefings 
and key leader engagement prior to specific operations effectively conducting 
prebuttal.  
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-9 3rd Edition Change 1 
d.      In Theatre Corporate Memory.  It is vital that all facts relating to 
incidents or events that triggered them including what happened, what was 
done about it, and recommendations for the future are recorded on a database 
within JFHQ and retained for 
future reference.  This is particularly important 
for enduring campaigns where such a database provides a useful tool for 
rebuttal in the event that the media or other actors make allegations based on 
historical events. 
Operational Records and Lessons Identified 
416. Operational Records.  The JTFC is accountable for maintaining operational 
records, which should be periodically sent to the Chief Information Of
ficer’s 
Corporate Memory Branch in the MOD.  He ensures that all Services comply with 
their respective operational records policies.  Each of the Services has an established 
mechanism for the maintenance and archiving of operational records, providing a key 
source of information in the compilation of the post operational report.  
417. Operational Lessons Capture and Reporting.  Commanders, often down to 
sub-unit level, are required to produce post operational reports, mindful that lessons 
capture is a continuous process that commences from initial planning to eventual 
recovery
.  The JTFC is directed in the Joint Commander’s Directive to produce a high-
level lessons report, which, in most cases, provides the bulk of the post operational 
report.  It covers, but is not limited to, lessons of: 
 critical importance to the Joint Commander; 
 special consideration, which may have long term, far reaching 
implications across all Defence lines of development; and 
 significance to training establishments. 
418. Anticipate, Learn and Adapt.  Adversaries will seek to exploit our 
vulnerabilities and they may adapt rapidly in order to do so.  Military organisations, at 
all levels, m
ust respond by anticipating, learning and adapting if they are to seize and 
maintain the initiative.  The philosophy and ethos to sustain a culture of continuous 
improvement and adaptation will come from the JTFC.  He should be aware of 
cultural and institutional interests that may stifle, and obstruct, attempts to learn.  He 
should counter them with an innovative ethos, instilled through education and training.  
SECTION IV – INFORMATION SUPERIORITY 
419. Operational advantage can be gained by managing, in relative terms, the 
information flow better than your adversary; this is known as information superiority.4  
Conceptually, the flow of information has 3 component parts. 
                                           
4 JDP 0-01.1 UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database (8th Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4-10 3rd Edition Change 1 
a.      The commander specifies his information requirements. 
b.      The commander uses the information to gain a degree of understanding 
and situational awareness of the battlespace.  This understanding, which is 
influenced by his experience and intuition, enables him to make his operational 
decisions.   
c.      The commander’s decision on a course of action is dissemina ted within 
the organisation so that they can enact his direction.  
420. Technological advance has not changed the nature of the 3 components but has 
changed their character.  
Although technology has enhanced the range, speed, and 
volume of the bearers, and provided new formats for information and an improved 
ability to manipulate information, it has not necessarily enhanced either understanding 
or information exploitation.  The volume of information, the requirement to integrate 
numerous information sources and the speed of reaction can result in information 
overload, and consequently decision paralysis.  It can also lead to dependency on 
specific technology, applications or bearers to deliver mission critical information; this 
leads to reliance on potential single points of failure. 
421. The flow of information between, and within, the 3 component parts is 
achieved by
 a combination of bearer systems that transfer data, applications5 that 
convert data into information, and staff functions to understand the information and 
then exploit it.  Information exploitation is a function for all staff branches, as the 
commander and his staff use their understanding of information to enable their 
decision-making.  Information management6 combines the requirement to manipulate 
information with gaining understanding from the information.  It is a core activity 
requiring leadership as well as dedicated specialist support.  The JTFC must maximise 
information flow across the battlespace within available resources.  This will lead to 
the requirement for the commander to prioritise mission critical services.  To 
maximise the benefits of information, COS should engender a culture of sharing and 
collaboration pan-headquarters and between organisations.  He must strike the right 
balance between security, which implies a responsibility to protect information, and 
effective inter-agency cooperation through information sharing.  Further information 
on information superiority, management and exploitation can be found in JDP 6-00 
Communications and Information Systems Support to Joint Operations. 
 
 
 
                                           
5 The bearers and applications are known as Communication and Information Systems (CIS).  CIS are: the assembly of 
equipment, methods and procedures, and if necessary personnel, organised so as to accomplish specific information, 
conveyance and processing functions.  Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-6 NATO Glossary of Terms, 2010. 
6 Information management is: the integrated management processes and services that provide exploitable information on 
time, in the right place and format, to maximise freedom of action.  JDP-01 Campaigning (2nd Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4A-1  3rd Edition Change 1 
ANNEX 4A – JOINT TASK FORCE HEADQUARTERS’ 
GROUPS, BOARDS AND MEETINGS 
4A1.  Campaign management is enabled through a series of groups, boards and 
meetings that constitute the Joint Ta
sk Force Headquarters’ (JTFHQ) campaign 
rhythm.  These forums, together with a variety of other ad hoc and bespoke activities, 
may be used to conduct activity, effects and campaign reviews respectively.  It is 
imperative that the JTFHQ establishes a detailed schedule of meetings to ensure the 
consistent and reliable participation of all elements of the JTFHQ, as well as harmony 
with superior headquarters and across the Joint Task Force (JTF).  This must be 
carefully balanced against the competing demands on the Joint Task Force 
Commander (JTFC) and his staff. 
Briefings, Video Teleconferences and Meetings 
4A2. Commander’s Briefs.  Commander’s bri efs are normally conducted twice 
daily and set the direction for staff effort and briefing for the next period.  The JTFC is 
briefed on the last 12 hours in detail1 and the next 24 hours in outline.2  The briefs are 
given by the outgoing shift and should be attended by all available staff.  They usually 
conclude with the JTFC, or national contingent commander, emphasising certain 
aspects and giving specific direction and guidance.  When the Commander has 
departed, Chief of Staff (COS) will give further points of guidance and direction.  A 
Commander’s Secrets meeting at which STRAP Top Secret material is briefed will 
normally precede or succeed the JTFC’s morning brief.  When the UK is not lead 
nation but provides a national contingent commander, national briefs will normally 
precede his attendance at multinational JTFC briefings.  Briefing material prepared for 
the Commander’s briefs should be archived for the official Commander’s War Diary. 
4A3. Joint Task Force Commander’s Telephone Call to the Joint Commander 
and Permanent Joint Headquarters Operations T
eam Teleconference/Video 
Teleconferences.  Following the JTFC’s morning briefings his staff will engage at 
desk level with the PJHQ Operations Team Leader.  Subsequently, the JTFC will 
conduct a telephone call with the Joint Commander, with COS in attendance.  This is 
supplemented by an Operations Team VTC at some stage within the campaign rhythm 
(synchronised with the Defence Crisis Management Organisation (DCMO) process 
within the MOD), which the JTFC/national contingent commander will normally 
attend.3  The purpose of this, and the JTFC’s telephone call to the Joint Commander, is 
for the JTFC to receive guidance from the Joint Commander and output from the 
DCMO process.  It also provides the opportunity to discuss any areas of concern.  This 
                                           
1 Even within this detailed brief, staff should focus on key commander’s issues only. 
2 The period covered in general may vary to suit the tempo and intensity of operations, the nature of the headquarters and 
the JTFC’s personal preference. 
3 The JTFC’s attendance will be driven by the availability of the Joint Commander. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4A-2  3rd Edition Change 1 
VTC is normally only attended by the JTFC, his closest advisors, and subject matter 
experts as necessary.  Essentially, it takes a longer-term view and acts as a catalyst for 
dedicated staff effort.  This formal activity is likely to be supplemented, or on occasion 
replaced, by regular interaction between the Joint Commander and JTFC,4 either by 
VTC or telephone. 
a. Principals’ Meeting.  The Principals’ Meeting is the key meeting of the 
day to address wider cross-government aspects of the 
integrated campaign.  It 
will normally be chaired by Her Majesty’s Ambassador, with the Special 
Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) (if appropriate), the JTFC, 
other key advisors and, potentially, key local leaders in attendance.5   
b. Coalition Briefs.  Where the UK commands a m ultinational operation, 
additional briefings may be held to keep national contingent commanders and 
component commanders of the other nations informed of progress. 
Initial Planning   
 
4A4. Joint Command Group.  The Joint Command Group initiates cam paign 
planning meetings as required at the outset of a crisis, and on a regular basis once the 
campaign has begun.  Core membership of the Joint Command Group is the JTFC, 
COS, Deputy COS (DCOS), Political Advisor (POLAD) and Legal Advisor 
(LEGAD).  It may grow depending on the size of the JTFHQ to include Assistant COS 
(ACOS) and lead functional officers from the staff branches.  In particular, ACOS 
J2/3/5 should be included at an early stage in his potential role as Chief Intelligence, 
Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR).  He does not head the ISR Cell, but will 
ensure early coordination and synchronisation across staff branches from an 
intelligence and ISR perspective.  Component commanders, force elements, allies, 
coalition and other multi-agency partners, either in person or via VTC, may also 
participate.  Early representation from appropriate multi-agency partners, is essential 
for the overall coordination and synchronisation of the campaign.  The role of the Joint 
Command Group is to prioritise the planning effort and provide direction and 
guidance.  Within the estimate process (see Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP 5-00) 
Campaign Planning (2nd Edition), Chapter 2) the Joint Command Group develops 
overall understanding, conducts mission analysis, and assists the JTFC by providing 
direction on the formulation of potential courses of action. 
 
 
                                           
4 Similar interaction will be undertaken at COS level. 
5 Some participants may be linked by VTC. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4A-3  3rd Edition Change 1 
4A5. Joint Planning Group.  The Joint Planning Group i s the principal working 
level planning group for JTFHQ.  Under the direction of the COS and led by J5, it 
fuses planning by drawing representation from across the staff branches.  Importantly, 
it also includes component representation.  Notwithstanding the requirement for cross-
headquarters participation and input, J2 representation will be fundamental to the 
conduct of, and products from, the Group.  J2 will provide the group with 
understanding of the environment and the actors within it together with any strengths 
or vulnerabilities.  This will assist in developing an understanding of the conditions 
required to deliver the JTFC’s campaign objective or information effect.  Through this 
mechanism, emerging issues and concerns are addressed, priorities assigned and the 
developing plan endorsed.  Initially, the Group meets only when necessary, although 
this should be at least daily to allow J5 to outline and update the planning schedule, 
and highlight deadlines or points for clarification or direction.  In this way, emerging 
thinking can be tempered by factors and constraints.  Within the estimate process, the 
primary function of the Joint Planning Group is to: evaluate objects and factors; to 
develop and validate courses of action; evaluate their relative merits for JTFC 
selection; and produce the campaign directive.   
Coordination, Assessment and Iterative Planning   
 
4A6. Once the campaign has begun, the JTFHQ should adapt planning to the 
changing situation, guided by assessment, through a series of planning forums which 
begins with the Joint Force Planning Group. 
4A7. The Joint Force Planning Group is chaired by COS.  Its role is to assess the 
cam
paign and its immediate phases, refine planning accordingly
, monitor ongoing 
planning activity, approve completed plans and initiate contingency planning.  
Operational tempo dictates its frequency.6  It is attended by all staff division heads, 
with specialist advisors as necessary.  J2/ISR representation will be pivotal to ensuring 
shared situational understanding.  The Group reviews assessment in response to 
changes in the situation or as dictated by the campaign review cycle.  The Group can 
be considered the start of the campaign review process, and it will revisit assessment 
at various stages in the production of Operation Plans (OPLANs) and Operation 
Orders (OPORDs).  The meeting is divided into 2 parts straddling both J3 and J5 areas 
of responsibility, with J2/ISR embedded in both.  On occasion, the JTFC may attend. 
a. J35 (Present Phase).  Led by COS, discussions start with an assessment 
of effects and activities currently being progressed.  J35 then outlines the 
intentions of the component commanders, followed by Operations Support 
and DCOS.  The COS gives direction on the way he sees the p
hase 
developing, making adjustments to planning as necessary.  The output of this 
sub-session will be formulated by J35 Plans and may include revising the 
                                           
6 Likely to be every 4/5 days as a minimum. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4A-4  3rd Edition Change 1 
supporting effects priority list, commander’s guidance7 or a redistribution of 
resources including an amended air apportionment plan. 
b. J5 (next phase).  J5 assesses campaign pr ogress, evaluates the 
requirements for changes in sequencing and the need for Contingency Plans 
(CONPLANS), branches or sequels or whether a new OPLAN is taken 
forward for the next stage of the campaign.  The JTFC, through the COS, 
directs contingency planning.   
4A8. Operational Planning Teams.  Operational Planning Teams are small planning 
groups focused on specific, or specialist planning activity, with bespoke mem
bership.  
A number of Operational Planning Teams may run concurrently with leadership 
devolved to the most appropriate staff branch.  Following the break-up of the Joint 
Force Planning Group, the headquarters may form Operational Planning Teams to 
staff discrete aspects of the campaign.  They will report to COS with 
recommendations. Within an established deadline. 
4A9. Joint Coordination Board.  The Joint Coordination Board (JCB) is the JTFC’s 
principal meeting.  It assists the detailed coordination and synchronisati
on of JTF 
activity and effects, issues commander’s guidance on priorities across components and 
resolves disagreement.  The frequency of the JCB is dictated by campaign tempo but 
could be daily.  It is chaired by the JTFC but orchestrated by COS.  The DCOS, 
component commanders (in person, by VTC, or represented by their senior liaisons), 
POLAD, LEGAD, J2/ISR, Targeting, and J3 Operations Support staff, and other 
individuals attend as required.  The JTFC gives direction on the output from the Joint 
Effects Meetings (JEMs), decides on the assignment of forces, approves targeting 
priorities and sets the context for execution out to approximately 120 hours.8  The 
main function of the meeting is to ensure that activity accords to the tempo required by 
the JTFC.  The JTFC dictates the agenda, which is likely to include:9  
a. A short update by component commanders and staff on recent 
developments.  This may in
clude an intelligence update. 
b. Measurement of activity and measurement of effect, presented by J3 
Operations Support.  This will be influenced by the camp
aign tempo; 
measurement of activity is generally reviewed as part of the daily campaign 
rhythm cycle (often linked to the Air Tasking Order production cycle).  
Review of measurement of effect may be required daily, particularly in the 
case of specific desired effects on an opponent’s physical capability through 
                                           
7 The key output of the Joint Coordination Board (JCB) that then drives both Joint Force Planning Group and Joint 
Effects Meetings. 
8 National contingents should also run parallel meetings where they will ensure their contingent is synchronised with the 
host component. 
9 The JCB will be preceded by a meeting to review its agenda and key actions, and be followed by a closed-group 
meeting to further discuss sensitive issues. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4A-5  3rd Edition Change 1 
high tempo, largely lethal activities.  Where the effects sought are cognitive, 
seeking attitudinal or behavioural shifts in disparate individuals and groups, 
then measurement of effect takes place over a much longer period to generate 
meaningful information. 
c. Back-briefs from components and branch heads. 
d. A summary of key events over the next 24 hours. 
e. JTFC/national contingent commander’s intent and guidance out to 120 
hours. 
f. Campaign effectiveness assessment, presented by J5, which underpins the 
JTFC’s cam
paign review and informs his decisions to initiate further planning 
(for example, CONPLANS and OPLANS).  Due to its all-encompassing 
nature, and the planning and assessment effort necessary to review campaign 
progress properly, campaign effectiveness assessment will be conducted to a 
timetable that best meets the needs of the particular campaign.   
g. Environmental assessments and intelligence. 
h. Direction given for the development of discrete CONPLANS. 
i. Rules of engagement considerations. 
j. Major logistic issues. 
4A10.  Joint Effects Meetings.  Two JEMs take place to support the JCB with their 
frequency related to campaign tem
po and that of the JCB.  Both consider the same 
agenda.  The first meeting, (JEM 1) is a working level meeting held soon after the 
Joint Coordination Board.  JEM 1 initiates the necessary interaction between 
components and the JTFHQ for effects development.  The second meeting (JEM 2) is 
chaired at COS or ACOS level, and is held immediately prior to the JCB.  Its function 
is to resolve inconsistencies in the desired effects and differences of opinion.  The 2 
meetings (supported throughout by J2/ISR) and the work generated in between, 
represents the joint effects process.  They aim to coordinate and synchronise the 
application of lethal and non-lethal activities within the campaign.10  The joint effects 
process performs the following specific functions, which are finalised at the JEM 2, 
for endorsement by JCB: 
a. Review measurements of effects associated with the extant OPORD to 
inform subsequent recommendations on apport
ionment, resources and 
modifications to the current plan.   
                                           
10 The Joint Effects Meetings process is supported by a number of working groups including the Joint ISR Coordination 
Meeting, Joint Battlespace Management Working Group and the Joint Targeting Working Group. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 4A-6  3rd Edition Change 1 
b. Issue joint effects guidance to inform component planning up to 120 hours 
ahead. 
c. Draft and review ta
rget priorities, both for fires (out to 48 hours) and 
information activities (out to
 120 hours and possibly beyond). 
d. Endorse component plans for joint effects execution up to 24 hours ahead. 
e. Provide a forum for the coordination of battlespace management by J35 
staff. 
f. Update the various lethal and non-lethal ta
rget lists. 
4A11.  Joint Collection Management Board.  J2 should chair a daily Joint 
Collection Management Board to coordinate collection activities between components 
and com
plementary national agency activity.  This should be attended by the ISR Cell, 
a subject matter expert from each intelligence discipline, single intelligence 
environments (including targets) or national agencies and representatives from the 
components.  The purpose is to achieve the best possible mix of ISR activity to meet 
priority information and intelligence requirements during a set period (normally the air 
tasking cycle).  It may be necessary to produce and maintain a Joint Collection List 
that components can contribute to.  A Joint Integrated and Prioritised Collection List 
can be developed from this, which shapes the allocation of the most significant or 
immediate requirements, or tasks. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-1 3 rd Edition Change 1 
CHAPTER 5 – ASSESSMENT 
Chapter 5 describes the principles and practices of operational level assessment. 
   Section I – Overview 
 Section II – Assessment Categories 
Section III – Assessment Planning 
Section IV – Gathering Evidence 
Section V – Evaluating Evidence 
  Section VI – Assessment Support to Decision Making 
SECTION I – OVERVIEW 
Purpose of Assessment 
501. Assessment, defined as: the evaluation of pr ogress, based on levels of 
subjective and objective measurement in order to inform decision-making1 is 
fundamental to successful campaigning.  It provides the means for keeping the 
situation, and campaign progress, under continual review.  Within a dynamic 
environment assessment draws together intelligence and information to inform a Joint 
Task Force Commander’s (JTFC’s) judgements on the progress of operations, within a 
given timescale, and supports his subsequent decisions.  Assessment of progress must 
be relative to time; certain effects must be achieved within specific timeframes.  As a 
recognisable step in any decision cycle, assessment should be continuous and 
conducted concurrently at all levels. 
Commander’s Judgement 
502. The physical effects of fires are comparatively easy to measure.  The 
psychological effects of fires and influence activities are, however, likely to be less 
self-evident, with causal relationships between activity and effect far more difficult to 
establish.  At the same time, the means of measurement may also be more subjective, 
drawing largely on perception, comment and belief; all of which may be shaped by 
limited understanding, culture and a variety of pressures unrelated to the activity 
undertaken.  Furthermore, many of the means (such as polling) may be unachievable 
within a non-permissive security environment.  Assessment will, therefore, be as 
challenging as it is vital.   
503. In principle, as each required effect is established during planning, so should 
the means by which to measure and assess it, with resources allocated accordingly.
  
Moreover, a JTFC must decide how to display the results.  However, the JTFC and his 
staff should not become slaves to process.  Assessment should support not drive the 
                                                           
1 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01 (2nd Edition) Campaigning. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-2 3 rd Edition Change 1 
commander’s decision making process.  Empirical, objective evidence may be difficult 
to attain or too costly to deliver.  In some cases metrics may even be inappropriate.  
Regardless of the availability of assessment data, which should inform his decisions, 
the commander’s subjective judgement, based on his experience, awareness and feel 
for the situation, will be crucial.  The assessment process should not become 
mechanistic.  The framework set out within this Chapter requires judgement in 
its application and should have sound military judgement, based on sufficient 
information, at its heart.  Measures and processes that are cumbersome, self-
serving, unnecessarily complex and that occupy a disproportionate amount of 
staff time will consume too many resources.  That is not a suitable alternative to 
incisive decision making and risk taking. 
Joint Operations – Insights and Best Practice – July 2008 
Joint Warfare Centre – US Joint Forces Command 
“There is a danger in over-engineering and over-structuring assessment.  A balance is 
needed between a quantitative and qualitative approach.  Assessment, especially of the 
operational environment and the campaign, is tough, and in many cases subjective.  
Because of the difficulty in measuring and documenting progress on attainment of 
operational or strategic objectives, we’ve seen many staffs over-engineer assessment, 
building massive quantifiable briefings.  These do not always logically or clearly 
support a commander’s assessment requirement or assist him in developing guidance 
and intent……..We find that quantitative indicators should only serve as a potential 
start point for commanders’ and staffs’ subjective assessment based on their 
observations and experience……As best practice, commanders should balance a 
possible staff tendency toward a quantitative solution, limit the amount of time and 
effort their staffs put into quantifying assessments, and recognise their personal role in 
applying their experience, intuition, and own observations in an ‘art of war’ approach 
to assessment.” 
General (Retired) Gary Luck
Assessment and Campaigning 
504. Assessment falls under 3 categories; measurement of activity, measurement of 
effect and camp
aign effectiveness assessment, which are described at Section II.  Each 
contributes to campaigning in 3 ways: 
a.      Initial Campaign Planning.  Early consideration given to all categories 
of assessment pays dividends.  If staff understand the desired outcomes, they 
are bett
er placed to design the measures of activity, intended effects and overall 
campaign effectiveness. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-3 3 rd Edition Change 1 
b.      Iterative Planning.  Assessment supports iterative planning once the 
cam
paign has begun.  It enables a JTFC to issue definitive and timely orders, 
as well as retaining the ability to adapt quickly to changing circumstances. 
c.      Changing Situation.  Assessment also has a broader role; the validation 
of initial planning assumptions and the detection of changes in the situation 
beyond them
.  Moreover, it deepens a JTFC’s, (and his staff’s), understanding 
of the operating environment. 
Operational Art 
505. Like other aspects of campaigning, assessment is a manifestation of 
operational art, the ‘orchestration of a campaign, in concert with other agencies, 
involved in converti
ng strategic objectives into tactical activity, in order to achieve a 
desired outcome’.2  Successful assessment is thus a further embodiment of a JTFC’s 
skill: 
a.      Ways and Means.  Most activities within a camp aign can be measured.  
However, a JTFC must decide which aspects of his campaign can benefit most 
from assessment and prioritise them. 
b.      Operational Ideas.  Implementing assessment needs creative thought, 
or operational ideas, principally from the JTFC. 
c.      Ma
king Decisions.  Assessment inform s a JTFC’s decisions, which will 
be coloured by his broader view of proceedings, developed through personal 
engagement with subordinates and partners, and the views of higher 
commands.  Scrutinising and challenging assessment data is an important part 
of his broader decision-making repertoire. 
Campaign Design and Management 
506. The staff are responsible for the processes within campaign design3 and 
campaign management4 that comprise assessment: 
a.      Planning Assessment.  While the JTFC provides guidance and direction 
on what he wishes to assess, detailed planning falls predomin
antly to the staff.     
b.      Gathering Assessment Evidence.  The JTFC’s assessment intentions 
place responsibilitie
s upon subordinate tactical commanders for the gathering 
                                                           
2 JDP 01 (2nd Edition). 
3 ‘Campaign design develops and refines the commander’s (and staff’s) ideas to provide detailed, executable and 
successful plans.’  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition)). 
4 ‘Campaign management integrates, coordinates, synchronises and prioritises the execution of operations and assesses 
progress.’  (JDP 01 (2nd Edition)). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-4 3 rd Edition Change 1 
of data.  Assessment at the operational level also draws on the views of 
strategic headquarters and those of multinational and multi-agency partners.   
c.      Evaluating Assessment Evidence.  The JTFC guides evaluation of 
evidence.  This draws on a range of expertise and techniques, but ultimately 
military judgement takes precedent. 
d.      Assessment Support to Decision-Making.  Assessment data must be 
presented in a manner which is tailored to, and best supports, the JTFC’s 
decision-making. 
507. Headquarters Practices.  Headquarters assessme nt practices are dependent 
upon the type of campaign and available resources.  This chapter draws examples from 
the practices of a Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ) and other headquarters.  
During multinational and multi-agency operations assessment practices may differ and 
are likely to be complicated by the requirement for national, multinational and multi-
agency evidence gathering and contrasting approaches to evaluation.  In such 
situations, a JTFC should manage expectations for evidence gathering and evaluation, 
striving where possible for simplicity and clarity.   
SECTION II – ASSESSMENT CATEGORIES  
508. Campaigning envisages a hierarchical relationship between campaign 
objectives, decisive conditions, supporti
ng effects and activity.  Their relationship with 
the 3 categories of assessment are shown in Figure 5.1.  Measurement of activity, 
measurement of effect and campaign effectiveness assessment feature at different 
stages in a headquarters’ campaign rhythm. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-5 3 rd Edition Change 1 
 
Figure 5.1 – Assessment Categories 
509. Measurement of Activity.  Measurement of activity is defined as ‘assessment 
of task performance and achievement of its associated purpose’.5  It is an evaluation of 
what actions have been completed rather than simply what has been undertaken – did 
we do, properly, the things we planned to do?  For example, in an attack on a 
Command and Control (C2) installation, measurement of activity would be concerned 
with the level of physical destruction to C2 facilities, as opposed to the number of 
sorties flown.  Although it may give an approximation of the outcome, measurement 
of activity primarily provides an initial test and adjust function.  It informs decisions 
on whether activity should be repeated or altered.  The JTFC may draw on 
measurement of activity to inform his decisions, but it is essentially tactical business.  
Battle damage assessment is the most common form of measurement of activity.  In 
general there is a quantitative and qualitative nature to measurement of activity.  
Measurement of activity is generally reviewed within the daily campaign rhythm, 
under the activity review cycle. 
510. Measurement of Effect.  Measurement of effect is defined as ‘the assessment 
of the reali
sation of specified effects.’  Measurement of effect considers what effects, 
intended and unintended, have been realised – did we do the right things?  Drawing 
on various forms of measurement and perspectives, yet avoiding unnecessary 
proliferation and complexity, it is used to monitor and assess progress, and highlight 
                                                           
5 JDP 01 (2nd Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-6 3 rd Edition Change 1 
setbacks.  Measurement of effect is used, predominantly, to support current and 
imminent planning decisions.  The effects review cycle may be required daily, but is 
more likely to be protracted, especially where desired effects are more disparate and 
subtle, such as influencing a group’s will. 
511. Campaign Effectiveness Assessment.  Campaign effectiveness assess ment is 
defined as ‘evaluation of campaign progress, based on levels of subjective and 
objective measurement in order to inform decision-making.’6  It considers the timely 
progress of the campaign – are the right things, done properly, getting us where we 
want to go or need to be within the desired timescale?  Campaign effectiveness 
assessment is, predominantly, the JTFC’s concern.  Due to the planning and 
assessment effort necessary to review campaign progress properly, campaign 
effectiveness assessment is conducted to a timetable that best meets a JTFC’s needs, 
based on the scale, complexity and tempo of operations.  Campaign effectiveness 
assessment may be carried out daily or weekly, but is likely to occur on a monthly (or 
longer) basis.  During TELIC 1, a daily campaign review cycle was employed initially, 
while International Security Assistance Force (Afghanistan) IX reviewed the campaign 
every 2 months. 
SECTION III – ASSESSMENT PLANNING 
Assessment and Operational Planning 
512. Assessment planning is an intrinsic element of operational planning.  As 
decisive conditions, supporting effects and 
activities are derived, assessment measures 
are developed for each.  Equal focus should be given to the identification of potential 
unintended effects.  Associated evidence gathering will use Joint Task Force (JTF) 
resources, and subsequent planning, which will be conducted collaboratively with 
component staff, should include intentions for what is to be gathered, when, and by 
whom. 
Deriving Measures of Effect 
513. Guiding Principles.  Measurement of effect should provi de succinct 
indications of change and effect.  However, absolute, unequivocal measurement will 
rarely be achievable.  In particular, influence activities, which seek to realise subtle 
psychological effects, sometimes over protracted periods, may frustrate this goal.  
Imagination and a thorough appreciation of the context is required.  While lessons 
from previous operations can provide a useful starting point, there is no guarantee that 
different situations will follow similar patterns.  A prerequisite of measurement of 
effect derivation is, therefore, thorough analysis.   
                                                           
6 JDP 01 (2nd Edition). 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-7 3 rd Edition Change 1 
514. Physical, Virtual and Cognitive Domains.  JDP 01  (2nd Edition) 
Campaigning, Annex 3A describes 3 domains: the physical, virtual and cognitive.  An 
effect could be realised in several domains and measurements of effect should strive to 
consider a range of relevant perspectives, while avoiding unnecessary proliferation of 
measures.  While the physical is often easier and quicker to measure, the virtual and 
cognitive domains provide insights of equal or greater importance.  This is illustrated 
in Figure 5.2. 
Cognitive
Domain
Virtual
Domain
Effect
Military
Leadership
of Country
‘X’
Deterred
Measurement
of effect 1
Level of ‘X’
Military
Mobilisation
Measurement
of effect 2
Level of ‘X’
Military
Aggressive
Activity
Measurement
of effect 3
Level of Own
Military
Moblisation
Measurement
of effect 4
Public
Aggression of
‘X’ Leadership
Measurement
of effect 5
Reporting of
Own
Deterrence
Message
Measurement
of effect 6
Behavioural
Indicators
of ‘X’
Leadership
Physical
Domain
 
Figure 5.2 – Effects in the Physical, Virtual and Cognitive Domains 
515. Metrics.  Not everything can be measured precisely.  Some measuremen ts of 
effect are suited to quantitative analysis and the application of metrics, others are more 
qualitative and demand greater subjective judgement; conflict is an essentially human 
activity and measurement may be driven by intuition.  Metrics provide useful 
supporting evidence, but gathering supporting data must not be the overriding 
consideration. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-8 3 rd Edition Change 1 
516. Measuring.  The JTFC should draw a distinction between what he seeks to 
measure and the m
eans of gathering data to measure it.  For example, polling is not a 
measurement, whereas the numbers expressing their intention to vote in an election is.  
While the means must be evaluated to ensure that they are appropriate, this is not an 
integral part of the assessment of the activity or effect being measured. 
517. Causality.  The link between activity and effect is often apparent – for 
example, between fires and their physical ef
fects.  This may be less well defined in 
other types of activity, however.  The attribution of psychological effects, like the 
mood of a population or the will of a leader, to specific activities is often more 
difficult.  Thus, while changes in behaviour and attitude may be associated with an 
activity, only a historical perspective can argue with conviction that eventual effects 
were caused by specific activities.  However, causality is worth deep investigation in 
the formulation of plans.  Some effects may not prove enduring, and an understanding 
of why they have been realised, and how own activity has contributed to them, 
supports iterative planning and execution.  There are a variety of reasons for this, but 
most commonly the target audience or individual becomes desensitised to activity 
being undertaken against them.  Cultural modelling, in particular, may provide 
significant additional clarity, while operational analysis staff may provide useful 
advice. 
518. Deception.  The manipulation of perceptions is the modus operandi of 
deception; consequently, an adversary could use measurement of effect to deceive th
e 
JTFC.  Equally, there is potential for self-deception, where evidence gathered is used 
selectively to reinforce a pre-conceived view – a form of group-think.  In formulating 
measurements of effect, therefore, the JTFC and staff must seek a range of 
perspectives – drawing on red teams and subject matter experts, supported by cultural 
modelling techniques – to expose contradictions and defend against deception. 
519. Monitoring Progress.  Assessment of progress may be monitored using 
baselines, success criteria and th
resholds.  A graphical, traffic light system (see Figure 
5.3) may be useful in visualising movement towards objectives.  However, red should 
not necessarily be taken to signify failure, nor green to indicate overall success.  
Indeed, the delta between baseline and success may be marginal and inappropriate for 
reflection as a transition between red, through amber to green.  Headquarters could 
place baselines and success criteria anywhere across the spectrum, with baselines for 
each effect placed to indicate their relationship to time or importance: 
a.      Baseline.  Baselines are ‘criteria to which assessments of progress are 
referred for correlation’.7  Establishing a proper baseline is often important, 
particularly when deriving intangible measurements of effect.  Baselines 
represent an understanding, whether subjective or with supporting metrics, of 
                                                           
7 New definition, developed from Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-6, for this publication and for future UK 
doctrine. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-9 3 rd Edition Change 1 
expected norms.  If possible, they should include expectations of indigenous 
populations, historic analysis and the views of subject matter experts.  
Baselines should not, necessarily, be set at the level encountered during a 
breaking crisis.  For example, if a particular measurement of effect were based 
on the availability of electric power, it is important to understand what levels 
existed well before the crisis erupted.  However, expectations of the 
indigenous population are a fundamental baseline driver, which are likely to be 
amended by intervention.  Setting baselines, therefore, at pre-conflict/crisis 
levels may not always be appropriate.  
b.      Thresholds.  Thresholds are ‘criteria identifying progress’,8 and may be 
used to identify milestones in the realisation of effects.  These may include 
both subjective statements or metrics. 
c.      Success Criteria.  Success criteria are ‘criteria identifying achievement 
of success’.9  They consist of statements, supported by quantifiable objectives, 
and may be time-related, or more likely, conditions-based. 
 
Figure 5.3 – Baselines, Success Criteria and Thresholds 
SECTION IV – GATHERING EVIDENCE 
520. Gathering evidence in support of assessment draws on a range of headquarters 
specialists, tactical formations, strategic headquarters, and multinational and mu
lti-
agency partners.  This requires significant coordination and liaison.  The JTFC must 
establish mechanisms appropriate to what he wishes to know, as well as the context of 
the campaign.  A JTFHQ often uses a Measurement of Effect Assessment Sheet, 
developed and coordinated by J3 Operations Support.  This ensures that tactical 
evidence gathering serves tactical requirements and complements those of the JTFHQ. 
521. Joint Task Force Commander.  A JTFC should add his uni que, pan-theatre, 
insights to the evidence presented by his staff.  It is a sense of perspective that 
distinguishes effective evaluation from mere measurement.  Ultimately, it is for a 
JTFC to take an overview of developments, including the views of other government 
                                                           
8 New definition developed for this publication and for future UK doctrine. 
9 New definition developed for this publication and for future UK doctrine. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-10 3 rd Edition Change 1 
departments, allies and coalition partners, and any guidance from superior 
commanders.  Conversely, the staff may have evidence that changes the JTFC’s 
personal assessment of the situation. 
522. J2 Intelligence Reporting.  J2 is the origi n of a range of evidence used in 
assessment.  In addition to a detailed understanding of the actors, J2 collect general 
and specific information and intelligence that informs measurements of activity and 
measurements of effect.  A range of sources, in particular Human Intelligence 
(HUMINT) and Signals Intelligence (SIGINT), underscore a variety of cognitive 
measurements of effect, through insights into the intentions, morale, and behaviour of 
leadership and other important figures.  HUMINT also supports the formulation of 
views on the moods and opinions of the local population. Planning should identify 
these requirements.  
523. Battle Damage Assessment.  Battle damage assessment is used to assess the 
consequences of fires, through collection and analysis of evidence.  While the raw data 
primarily serves measurement of activity, suitably analysed, it can also inform 
measurement of ef
fect and campaign effectiveness assessment through 3 phases: 
a.      Phase 1 – Physical Damage Assessment. 
b.      Phase 2 – Functional Damage Assessment. 
c.      Phase 3 – Target System Asses
sment. 
524. J3 Reporting.  In its simplest form , J3 reporting provides measurement of 
activity in addition to the more specific battle damage assessment associated with 
fires.  It can also provide cognitive insights, such as the attitudes and activity of 
indigenous populations.  Examples include numbers in school, estimates of power 
usage, flow of water supplies, recruits to new security force structures, numbers of 
refugees or internally displaced persons, volumes of economic activity and numbers of 
non-governmental organisations at work.  Subordinate/component commanders have a 
significant role to play, not only in reporting but also in analysis and assessment of 
data, in the context of their intimate experience at the tactical level.  This reporting 
may be enhanced through the addition of ethnographic research techniques. 
525. Human Factors Research.  Human factors research has developed as the 
primary means of measuring psychologica
l effect.  It is provided through a range of 
complementary techniques available in theatre or from the home-base: 
a.      Opinion Polling.  Opinion polling provides an objective measurement 
of perceptions.  Once analysed, it is probably the most effective means of 
quantifying any shifts in attitude.  To be meaningful, however, polling must be 
conducted against an understanding of local mores and expectations.  An initial 
survey to baseline prevailing perceptions amongst target audience(s) is 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-11 3 rd Edition Change 1 
therefore essential.  This survey should endeavour to provide an assessment of 
both existing and desired attitudes, providing an indication of how far attitudes 
need to be changed and signposting what steps need to be taken to achieve 
change.  In addition, it is important to frame questions in a culturally sensitive 
manner in order to elicit the required responses.  There are a number of 
pragmatic challenges that need to be accounted for when considering using 
polling techniques.  For example: 
(1)    The likely delay between data gathering and analysis, as polling is 
frequently conducted through locally employed field agencies. 
(2)    If military intervention is opposed in any way, polling of the 
indigenous population is only possi
ble after a presence has been 
established on the ground.  Internet polling can partially ameliorate this 
problem if the target population is technically accessible. 
b.      Focus Groups.  Focus group techniques can provide an effective measure 
of changing attitudes and lay the groundwork for polling.  They should take 
place from the outset of a campaign, providing access to the target audience is 
possible. 
c.      Personality and Group Profile Assessments.  Personality and group 
profiles, conducted remo
tely or by in-theatre HUMINT assets, can provide key 
insights and support a range of cognitive measurements of effect. 
526. Media Output Analysis.  It is often uncertain to what extent the media r eflects 
or shapes public attitudes.  Media output analysis is, however, a simple means of 
gauging public opinion.  It goes beyond just monitoring – simply because a story is 
reported by the media may not mean that it has affected the public: 
a.      Broadcast and Printed Media.  For the traditional media, the JTFC and 
his staff should account for the influence of particular stations or journals, or 
even the reputation of their journalists.  They shoul
d then make an assessment 
of how widely a given theme has developed.  Analysis of both UK domestic, 
regional and local media coverage can yield valuable insights.  Unlike high 
frequency research, it can be undertaken from afar and through open sources.  
Additionally, it provides a culturally sensitive assessment that places specific 
events in a wider context.  It is, therefore, helpful in gauging their impact on 
perceptions. 
b.      On-Line Media.  The World-Wide Web offers a further source of 
material that potentially reflects public attitudes.  Web-logging (blogging), chat-
room
s and on-line surveys offer third party analysts a potential means of 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-12 3 rd Edition Change 1 
assessing attitudes.  It does, however, rely on an audience’s technical literacy, 
and is extremely vulnerable to hostile manipulation and influence.  
527. Other Government Department Assessments.  The JTFC and staff should 
also consider other governme
nt department reporting as a means of informing 
measurement of effect, for example diplomatic telegrams, or Stabilisation Unit 
stability assessments. 
SECTION V – EVALUATING EVIDENCE 
528. The staff evaluate assessment evidence in order to inform a JTFC’s decision-
making.  
This evaluation must not tell the JTFC what he already knows, but offer him 
considered, evidence-based conclusions.  The mode of evaluation will depend upon 
the nature and level of the decision – whether regarding adjustments to current orders 
and plans or the campaign as a whole.  Annex 4A describes the boards and meetings in 
which assessment is developed and presented. 
529. Evaluating Measurement of Activity Evidence.  Different types of 
measurement of activity require varying levels of ev
aluation.  Battle damage 
assessment Phase 3, for example, can take 24-hours or more to conduct.  In high 
tempo operations, this may become a limiting factor in the JTFC’s decision-making.  
In a JTFHQ, J35 and J3 Operations Support lead measurement of activity, supported 
by subordinate tactical commanders and superior commands. 
530. Evaluating Measurement of Effect Evidence.  The challenge facing the 
analyst is discerning whether an ef
fect is being achieved.  Operational analysis staff 
and metrics support the process, but military judgement is the key.  Data is then 
scrutinised, including any apparent discrepancies that could be relevant.  The 
established baselines, thresholds and success criteria provide a framework for this 
evaluation, and steer staff away from median assessments in the absence of clear 
trends.  J3 Operations Support leads evaluation of measurement of effect.  The Joint 
Coordination Board and Joint Effects Meetings debate the conclusions. 
531. Campaign Effectiveness Assessment.   
a.      Measurement of Effect.  Aggregate measurement of effect should 
norma
lly inform campaign effectiveness assessment.  Given the potential 
number of measurements of effect associated with a campaign, however, this 
may be a resource intensive task.  Instead, a JTFC may elect to monitor 
selected measurements of effect, perhaps focusing on those effects that are the 
subject of current and imminent plans and orders, or key measurements of 
effect across the whole campaign. 
b.      Joint Task Force Commanders Perspective.  While the staff may 
assist him
 in his deliberations, campaign effectiveness assessment is the 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-13 3 rd Edition Change 1 
predominant concern of the JTFC, as it is his judgement of campaign progress, 
based on his appreciation of strategic level imperatives and assessment of 
tactical progress.  The JTFC’s takes an overview of developments and decides 
where the campaign will go next.  It is most often structured around 
assessments of progress towards decisive conditions and wider campaign 
objectives, and periodic reviews of the selected centre(s) of gravity.  J5 provide 
the lead, drawing on J3 Operations Support as necessary.  Their 
recommendations are developed during Joint Force Planning Groups, and 
presented at the Joint Coordination Board. 
c.      A Changing Situation.  Campaign effectiveness assessment also looks 
beyond orig
inal planning assumptions, to question whether the situation has 
changed beyond those on which the campaign was founded.  The staff should 
therefore be attuned to evidence that may indicate this.  This leads to updates 
in ongoing analysis. 
SECTION VI – ASSESSMENT SUPPORT TO DECISION-MAKING 
532. The ultimate purpose of assessment is to inform a JTFC’s judgem ents on the 
progress of operations, and support his subsequent decisions.  Accordingly, assessment 
should strive to answer 2 key questions: what decisions does the JTFC need to make 
and how can assessment be presented to best support them? 
Joint Force Commander’s Decisions 
533. Assessment informs 2 types of JTFC decision-making, that take place at 
different stages in the campaign rhythm: 
a.      Current Plans.  Measurement of activity and measurement of effect 
inform reviews of progress against current orders.  Activity is monitored 
regularly t
hrough measurement of activity, to confirm that what was planned 
and directed has occurred, and if not, prompt corrective action.  Measurement 
of effect monitors the achievement of those supporting effects sought through 
the execution of current orders.  It indicates when those orders are nearing 
completion or require amendment.  This may take place daily, for high tempo, 
largely kinetic activities, or over much longer periods where the desired effects 
are more subtle.   
b.      Future Plans.  Campaign effectiveness a ssessment assists a JTFC to 
determine how a campaign is progressing and informs decisions on what to do 
next.  Campaign effectiveness assessment is presented by J5, supporting a 
JTFC’s campaign review and providing a timetable for decisions about further 
planning. 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-14 3 rd Edition Change 1 
Presenting Assessment to Support Decision-Making 
534. The JTFC’s particular decision-making style should be supported by 
assessment data and evaluations presented in a focused, conci
se fashion.  The staff are 
guided by his preferences and any specific questions posed. 
535. Measurement of Effect.  Options, illustrated at Annex 5B, include: 
a.      Option 1 - Fused Measurements of Effect.  Progress on each effect is 
presented as a single fusion of the evaluated measurement of effect data.  This 
may be done as a traf
fic light, or sliding bar.  Baselines, thresholds and success 
criteria are included as statements or figures along the bar.  It can also be used 
to depict trend analysis.  Its disadvantage comes from the fusion process that 
underpins it.  Although a weighting technique may be applied in fusing the 
data, a subjective judgement is required, which may mask differences between 
measurements of effect that in fact highlight important information. 
b.      Option 2 - Individual Measurements of Effect.  This technique 
presents the full range of measurements 
for each effect, usually in a traffic 
light system.  This is a useful tool for evaluating where the campaign stands, as 
a snap-shot of progress.  Additionally, it should highlight discrepancies 
between different sources of evidence.  This system can, however, lead to 
ambiguity, as it offers only limited ways of characterising each threshold.  It 
may not be clear whether a yellow light is almost green or almost red, for 
example, or whether red means that a particular measurement is likely to 
recover rapidly, or is on the verge of collapse.  The rationale and meaning of 
each colour should, therefore, be explicit. 
c.      Option 3 - Graphs and Charts.  Fused measurement of effect data or 
individual measurements of effect may be tracked o
ver time using charts or 
graphs.  This technique lends itself to trend analysis and forecasting, as well as 
pictorial representation of baselines, thresholds and success criteria.  It is more 
applicable to quantitative data, though cognitive measurements of effect may 
be plotted subjectively (Low–Medium–High). 
d.      Option 4 - Forecasting.  As well as graphical techniques, staff should 
develop detailed statements for each effect.  They att
empt to forecast what the 
situation should look like in the future if the plan is successful.  These 
statements can then be used as a check on progress. 
536. Campaign Effectiveness Assessment.  Campaign effectiveness assessment is 
usually presented using the JTFC’
s campaign schematic.  A tiered approach, it should 
broadly describe progress along key lines of operation, prioritise key conditions in line 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-15 3 rd Edition Change 1 
with the JTFC’s direction and present measurement of effect.  Annex 5C illustrates 
some examples.  Again, these schematics can include trend analysis. 
537. Tailored Presentation Techniques.  The JTFC and his staff can also tail or 
presentation to the specific context, or to answer specific questions.  Annex 5D shows 
2 examples. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 5-16 3 rd Edition Change 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 5A-1 3rd Edition Change 1 
ANNEX 5A – THE MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT 
ASSESSMENT SHEET 
5A1. The Measurement of Effect Assessment Sheet provi des a framework for assessment 
planning and gathering of supporting evidence.  An example is at Appendix 5A1.  The 
Measurement of Effect Assessment Sheet identifies how measurement of effect will be 
reported, detailing responsibilities.  Joint Task Force Headquarters (JTFHQ) Divisions and 
subordinate tactical or component commanders could all be expected to contribute to it.  
Multinational and multi-agency partners, as well as strategic headquarters, may also report 
against this format.  Relevant force instruction documents or Operation Orders (OPORDs) 
direct the frequency with which the Measurement of Effect Assessment Sheet is completed.  A 
reporting matrix appendix (see Appendix 5A2), where reporting commands and organisations 
can include their own objective and subjective evaluations, supports the Measurement of 
Effect Assessment Sheet.  Textual remarks are accompanied by evaluations of progress against 
baselines, thresholds and success criteria using a colour grading system.  An example is 
shown at Figure 5A.1. 
Colour key
Not assessed
Success Criteria - A statement of what the favoured or desired situation looks like,
which may include associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what significant success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what partial success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Baseline  - A statement of what the current situation looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures) based on baseline
assessments.
 
Figure 5A.1 – The Measurement of Effect Assessment Sheet Colour Code 
5A2. An arrow descriptor may be included, either to show trends or provide a prediction of 
progress over a specified period, as shown in Figure 5A.2.  This projection is grounded in 
m
ilitary judgement, supported by metrics. 
Progress key
Improve(d)
No change
Worsen(ed)
 
Figure 5A.2 – The Measurement of Effect Assessment Sheet Prediction Arrows 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 5A-2 3rd Edition Change 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5A1-1
APPENDIX 5A1 – EXAMPLE MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT ASSESSMENT SHEET 
Supporting 
Effect 
Number 
Description 
 
 
Measurement 
of Effect 
Baseline 
Thresholds 
Success Criteria 
Evidence 
 
Remarks 
 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) 
Supporting 
Effect No. 
Description of 
supporting 
effect as detailed in OPLAN/ OPORD. 
Measurements of effect that 
will be used to 
track and measure the progress of the supporting effects.  These should include a mix of physical and psychological, quantitative and qualitative, as appropriate to the supporting effect. 
Baseline, thresholds and success criteria for each (or 
key) measurement of effect.  
These may be as subjective statements, or with additional metric data.  Percentages or raw data may be applied, for example: - Generic percentage improvements (25%, 50% etc) requiring subjective judgements. 
- Specific measures expressed as a percentage (such as daily electricity supply). 
- Number of incidents or events (such as Improvised Explosive Device incidents per month). 
 
This section should detail what evidence 
will be used in tracking 
and measuring effects (J2, J3 and other staff branch reporting, battle damage assessment, Human Factors Research, media output analysis, Foreign and Commonwealth Office reporting, Stabilisation Unit/Department for International Development reporting, military partner reporting), and who has responsibility for gathering them.  This will be supported by the assessment liaison architecture, which may be included in the Force Instruction Document. 
This section should provide any additional information required to 
understand what the Joint Task Force 
Commander’s intent is for this supporting 
effect and what is intended from the supporting measurement of effect.  It may also detail how the gathering of evidence will be coordinated with, and de-conflicted from, the conduct of the campaign. 
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5A1-2
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5A2-1
APPENDIX 5A2 – EXAMPLE MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT REPORTING MATRIX 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
Colour key
Not assessed
Success Criteria - A statement of what the favoured or desired situation looks like,
which may include associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what significant success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what partial success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Baseline  - A statement of what the current situation looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures) based on baseline
assessments.
Supporting Effect
Supporting Effect as
detailed in OPLAN/
OPORD.
Colour
Assessment of
level progress.
Success Criteria
Threshold
Threshold
Baseline
Not assessed
Progress
Arrows signify-
ing direction of
progress.
SE Justification
Justification for the assessment of the
measurement of effect for this
supporting effect. This should provide
quantitative and qualitative
assessment of preformance/progress.
Measure
Measure(s) upon
which the
assessment has
been made.
Progress  key
Improve(d)
No changeWorsen(ed)
This is where the relevant commander/evidence gatherer should give his appraisal of progress in the current
OPLAN/OPORD. This should deal with areas of failure as well as success. This appraisal should draw on empirical data
as well as subjective data from such sources as intelligence or human contact.  Most importantly, the assessment should
contain the commander’s judgement on where operations sit with respect to anticipated progress. The assessment should
include any planned activity to reconcile areas that are falling behind and give any recommendations for additionalresources that are required.
Commander’s Overall Assessment of OPLAN
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5A2-2
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
(INTENTIONALLY BLANK) 
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5B-1
ANNEX 5B – PRESENTATION OF MEASUREMENTS OF EFFECT  
OPTION 1 – FUSED MEASUREMENTS OF EFFECT 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5B-2
OPTION 2 – INDIVIDUAL MEASUREMENTS OF EFFECT 
 
                       
 
 
This technique presents the full range of measurement of effects for each supporting effect usually in a traffic light system.  
Its advantage is that discrepancies between measurement of effects and evidences are likely to be highlighted and 
discussed, which will assist in unearthing where the situation is changing in unpredicted ways.  A weakness is that the 
traffic light system can lead to ambiguity, as it is discrete and offers only limited ways of characterising each threshold. 
Supporting Effect 3.2 - Military leadership of country ‘X’ deterred
Measurements of Effect 1 -
Level of X Military Mobilisation
Measurements of Effect 2 -
Levels of Military Hostility
Measurements of Effect 3 -
Level of Own Capability
Measurements of Effect 4 - Public Levels
of Aggression of Key Leaders
Measurements of Effect 5 - Behavioural
Patterns of Leaders
Measurements of Effect 6 - Reporting of
own Deterrence Message
Colour key
Not assessedSuccess Criteria - A statement of what the favoured or desired situation looks like,
which may include associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what significant success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what partial success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Baseline  - A statement of what the current situation looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures) based on baseline
assessments.
   Progress key
     Improve(d)     No change
Worsen(ed)
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5B-3
OPTION 3 – GRAPHS AND CHARTS 
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Jan     Feb     Mar Apr
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Jan     Feb     Mar Apr
100
X Mobilisation
X Military HostilityOwn CapabilityX Aggressive PublicStatements
X Mobilisation
X Military HostilityOwn CapabilityX Aggressive PublicStatements
This Technique tracks
progress over time,through charts orgraphs. It is moreapplicable to quantita-tive data, however,
psychological
measurement of effectcan be plotted on‘subjective’ scales(LOW - MEDIUM -HIGH). Eitherindividual measure-ment of effect may beplotted, or fused to
show the progress of
individual supportingeffects. It lends itself toboth trend analysis andforecasting, as well aspictorial representationof baselines, thresh-olds and successCriteria (shown in the
chart example).
Colour key
Not assessed
Success Criteria - A statement of what the favoured or desired situation looks like,
which may include associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what significant success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what partial success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Baseline  - A statement of what the current situation looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures) based on baselineassessments.
Supporting Effect 3.2 - Military leadership of country ‘X’ deterred
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5B-4
OPTION 4 – FORECASTING 
D+3 0D a ys
Militias/bandits do not confront JTF. At
meetings they are deferential
JTF travelling freely throughout ‘X’ (FP
measure)
Murder rate fewer than 100/weekMass murder of
v50 not more than
1/monthBreaches to ceasefire no greater than
platoon strength/skirmish
Amnesty initiative for hand in of illegal
weapons begun by Police
Piracy incidents reduced by ?%
NGOs/IOs requests for JTF presence
infrequent
Demobilised child soldiers increase
(NGO statistics)
D+60 Da
ys
Number of known local militias/bandits, as a
result of JTF/Police presence and action
disbanded
Number of weapons handed in to Police
increases
Violent, anti-ethnic, mass demonstrations
infrequent; shows of JTF force nil
Murder rate fewer than 100/week
No incidents of mass murder 50)
Non-Governmental
Organisations/International Organisations
travel unescorted, in daylight throughout ‘X’,
provincial capitals and major population
centres, and along main supply routes
Supporting Effect 4.1
‘W’
Militia
Repatriated
2
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5C-1
ANNEX 5C – PRESENTATION OF CAMPAIGN EFFECTIVENESS ASSESSMENT 
EXAMPLE 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Line of
Operation 1
C2 Capability
Line of
Operation 2
Attrition
Line of
Operation 3
Contain
Line of
Operation 4
Isolate
Phase 1
Coerce
Phase 2
Attack
Phase 3
Defeat
DC 3 DC 4 DC 5
‘A’ C2
Exploited
Own
Capability
Demonstrated
‘A’ Navy Ports
Neutralised
‘A’ Navy
Defeated
‘A’ Navy
Flow of materiel into/out
of Country ‘A’ Denied
Campaign
End-State
Surrender of
Country ‘A’
garrison on
island ‘B’.
‘A’ Land Forces
Isolated
‘A’ Garrison
Yielded
‘A’ Garrison
Defeated
DC 1 DC 2
DC 7 DC 8
‘A’ C2
Neutralised
DC 6
‘A’ Navy
Dispersed
DC
Colour key
Not assessed
Success Criteria - A statement of what the favoured or desired situation looks like,
which may include associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what significant success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what partial success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Baseline  - A statement of what the current situation looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures) based on baseline
assessments.
Decisive Condition
Progress key
Improve(d)
No change
Worsen(ed)
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5C-2
EXAMPLE 2 
 
 Campaign End-State
A lasting peace in
which the threat of
violence and civil war
has been removed, and
Country ‘X’ has mature
political structures,
supported by reliable
infrastructure and
governance, providing
prosperity and security
for all its people.
Interim
Governance
Provided
Self-
Governance
Established
Secure
Environment
Maintained
Electoral
Process
Reformed
Key
Infrastructure
Restored
Sustained
Infrastructure
Established
Elected
Government
Empowered
Self-
Sustaining
Security
Established
DC 3
DC 1
Thematic Line of
Operation 1
Governance
Thematic Line of
Operation 2
Security
Thematic Line of
Operation 3
Political Process
Thematic Line of
Operation 4
Reconstruction
DC 2
DC 4
DC 5 DC 6
DC 7 DC 8
Current Situation
Near Civil War Lasting Peace
Favourable Situation
Colour key
Not assessed
Success Criteria - A statement of what the favoured or desired situation looks like,
which may include associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what significant success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what partial success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Baseline  - A statement of what the current situation looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures) based on baselineassessments.
Decisive Condition
Progress key
Improve(d)
No change
Worsen(ed)
DC
Operational
Centre of
Gravity
(National Coherence)
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5C-3
EXAMPLE 3 
 
 
EXAMPLE 4 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5C-4
EXAMPLE 4 
                                        Campaign End-State
A lasting peace in which the threat of violence and civil war has been
removed, and Country ‘X’ has mature political structures,
supporterd by reliable infrastructure and governance,
providing  prosperity and security
for all its people.
Self-
Sustaining
Security
Established
Elected
Government
Empowered
Electoral
Process
Reformed
DC 4
DC 6
DC 5
Political
Process
Operational
Centre of
Gravity
(National
Coherence)
Interim
Governance
Provided
Governance
Self-
Governance
Established
SecurityDC 1
DC 2
DC 3
Key
Infrastructure
Restored
DC 7 DC 8
Reconstruction
Sustained
Infrastructure
Established
Secure
Environment
Maintained
Colour key
Not assessed
Success Criteria - A statement of what the favoured or desired situation looks like,
which may include associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what significant success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Threshold - A statement of what partial success looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures).
Baseline  - A statement of what the current situation looks like, which may include
associated metrics (as percentages or raw data figures) based on baselineassessments.
Decisive Condition
Progress key
Improve(d)No change
Worsen(ed)
DC
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5D-1
ANNEX 5D – TAILORED ASSESSMENT PRESENTATION 
EXAMPLE 1 – SPECIFIC OPERATION ASSESSMENT 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

JDP 3-00 
 3rd Edition Change 1 5D-2
EXAMPLE 2 – MONITORING THE OPERATING ENVIRONMENT 
Water
70%
Electricity
80%
Utilities
Sewage
0%
Telephone
80%
Gas
0%
Fire
0%
Hospitals
0%
Dispensaries
0%
Medical
0%
Municipal
0%
Government
0%
Specific
0%
Disaster
Zone
Bridges
80%
Street
Lights
0%
In this example, a Disaster Relief Operation, the assessment presentation
technique has been modified to represent the key aspects of the situation that need to
be addressed and to track them individually using a pie-chart technique.
Judicial
0%
Waste
Disposal
50%
UtilitiesRefuse
50%
Admin
services
Common
50%
Logistics
50%
Protection
50%
Food
50%
Health
50%
Specific
10%
Primary
School
1/12
College
1/2
Education
Bridges
80%
Public
Transport
80%
Debris
removal
25%
High
School
0/8Middle
School
0/4
Shelter
70%
Police
50%
Routine
10%
Livelihoods
Water &
Sanitation
75%
Relief
Roads
50%
Disease
Survey
50%Emergency
10%
Trans-
portation
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-1 3rd Edition Change 1  
LEXICON 
This Lexicon contains acronyms/abbreviations and terms/definitions used in this 
publication.  For fuller reference on all UK and NATO agreed terminology, see the 
current editions of AAP-6 and JDP 0-01.1, The UK Supplement to The NATO 
Terminology Database (formerly known as the UK Glossary of Joint and Multinational 
Terms and Definitions). 
PART 1 - ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
ABCA   American-British-Canadian-Australian 
ACCE   Air Component Coordination Element 
ACOS   Assistant Chief of Staff 
AFRICOM   African Command 
AJP    Allied Joint Publication 
ATO    Air Tasking Order 
BCD    Battlefield Coordination Detachment 
BDD    British Defence Doctrine 
C2    Command and Control 
CBRN   Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear 
CDE    Collateral Damage Estimate 
CDS    Chief of the Defence Staff 
CIMIC   Civil-Military Cooperation 
CinC    Commander in Chief 
CIS    Communications and Information Systems 
CJO    Chief of Joint Operations 
CJOC    Combined Joint Operations Centre 
CJTF    Combined Joint Task Force 
CJTFC   Combined Joint Task Force Commander 
CONOPS   Concept of Operations 
CONPLAN   Contingency Plan 
COS    Chief of Staff 
D3A    Decide, Detect, Deliver, Access 
DCDC   Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre 
DCMO   Defence Crisis Management Organisation 
DCOS Deputy Chief of Staff 
DMC Defence Media Communications 
F3EA    Find, Fix, Finish, Exploit, Analyse 
FOC    Full Operating Capability 
FRAGO   Fragmentary Order 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-2 3rd Edition Change 1  
HUMINT   Human Intelligence 
IOC    Initial Operating Capability 
IMINT   Imagery Intelligence 
Info Ops   Information Operations 
ISR Intelligence, Surveilla nce and Reconnaissance 
ISTAR Intelligence, Surveillanc e, Target Acquisition and 
Reconnaissance 
JCB    Joint Coordination Board 
JDP    Joint Doctrine Publication 
JEM    Joint Effects Meeting 
JFACC   Joint Force Air Component Commander 
JFC    Joint Force Commander 
JFHQ    Joint Force Headquarters 
JFLCC   Joint Force Land Component Commander 
JFLogC   Joint Force Logistic Component 
JFLC    Joint Force Land Component 
JFMCC   Joint Force Maritime Component Commander 
JFSFC   Joint Force Sp ecial Forces Component 
JOA    Joint Operations Area 
JP    Joint Publication 
JTF    Joint Task Force 
JTFC    Joint Task Force Commander 
JTFHQ   Joint Task Force Headquarters 
JTL    Joint Target List 
LEGAD   Legal Advisor 
Media Ops   Media operations 
MIAOPS   Military Information Operations Action Plans 
MOD    Ministry of Defence 
MSE&SC   Military Strategic Effects and Strategic Communication 
NATO   North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
NCC    National Contingent Commander 
NCHQ   National Contingent Headquarters 
NEO    Non-Combatant Evacuation Operation 
NGO    Non-Governmental Organisation 
OISG    Operational Intelligence Support Group 
OPCOM   Operational Command 
OPCON   Operational Control 
Ops Coord   Operations Coordination 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-3 3rd Edition Change 1  
OPLAN   Operation Plan 
OPORD   Operation Order 
OPSEC   Operations Security 
Ops Sp   Operations Support 
PJHQ    Permanent Joint Headquarters 
POLAD   Political Advisor 
PSYOPS   Psychological Operations 
RSOI    Reception, Staging, On ward Movement and Integration 
RSOM   Reception, Staging, Onward Movement 
RTL    Restricted Target List 
SCIAD   Scientific Adviser 
SF    Special Forces 
SIGINT   Signals Intelligence 
SITREP   Situation Report 
SOP    Standard/Standing Operating Procedure 
SRSG    Special Representative of the Secretary General 
STANAG   Standardisation Agreements 
TACOM   Tactical Command 
TACON   Tactical Control 
TIO    Targeting and Information Operations 
TSS    Target Summary Sheet 
UN    United Nations 
VTC    Video Teleconference 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-4 3rd Edition Change 1  
PART 2 – TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
Agency 
a distinct non-military body which has objectives that are broadly consistent with 
those of the campaign.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition) 
Allotment 
the temporary change of assignment of forces between subordinate commanders.  The 
authority to allot is vested in the co
mmander having OPCON.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition) 
 
Analysis 
the examination of all the constituent elements of a situation, and their inter-
relationships, in order to obtain a thorough understanding of t
he past, present and 
anticipated future operational context.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Analysis 
in intelligence usage, a step in the processing phase of the intelligence cycle in which 
inform
ation is subjected to review in order to identify significant facts for subsequent 
interpretation.  (AAP-6) 
Apportionment 
the quantification and distribution by percentage of t
he total expected effort, in 
relation to the priorities which are given to the various air operations in geographic 
areas for a given period of time.  (AAP-6) 
Area of Operations 
a geographical area, defined by a Joint Force Commander within his Joint Operations 
Area, in which a commander designated by him (usually a component commander) is 
delegated authority to conduct operations.  See also Joint Operations Area.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Area of Interest 
the area of concern to a commander, relative to the objectives of current or planned 
operations, including his Joint Operations Area/Area of Operations and adjacent areas.  
See also Joint Operations Area and Area of Operations.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Assessment 
the evaluation of progress, based on levels of subjective and objective measurement in 
order to inform decision-making.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Baseline 
the criteria to which assessments of progress are referred for correlation.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-5 3rd Edition Change 1  
Battlespace 
all aspects of a Joint Operations Area within which military activities take place 
subject to Battlespace Management.  See also Battlespace Management and Joint 
Operations Area.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Battlespace Management 
the adaptive means and measures that enable the dynamic synchronisation of activities.   
(JDP 0-01.1 8th Edition) 
Campaign 
a set of military operations planned and conducted to achieve strategic objectives 
within a Theatre of Operations or Joint Operations Area, which normally involves 
joint forces.  (JDP 01 2nd Edition) 
Campaign Authority 
the authority established by international forces, agencies and organisations within a 
given situation in support of (or in place of) an accepted (or ineffective, even absent) 
indigenous government or organisation.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Note: It is an amalgam of 4 inter-dependent factors:  
 the perceived legitimacy of the authorisation or mandate for action;  
 the perceived legitimacy of the manner in which those exercising the mandate 
conduct themselves both individually and collectively; 
 the degree to which factions, local populations and others accept the authority of 
those executing the mandate;  
 and the degree to which the aspirations of factions, local populations and others 
are managed or met by those executing the mandate. 
Campaign Design 
campaign Design develops and refines the commander’s (and staff’s) ideas to provide 
detailed, executable and successful plans.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Campaign End-State 
the extent of the Joint Force Commander’s contribution to meeting the National 
Strategic Aim.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Campaign Effectiveness Assessment 
evaluation of campaign progress based on levels of subjective and objective 
measurement, in order to inform decision-making.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Campaign Management 
campaign Management integrates, coordinates, synchronises and priori
tises the 
execution of operations and assesses progress.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-6 3rd Edition Change 1  
Campaign Objective 
a goal, expressed in terms of one or more decisive conditions, that needs to be 
achieved in order to meet the National Strategic Aim.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
 
Campaign Plan 
a campaign plan is the actionable expression of a Joint Force Commander’s intent, 
articulated to subordinate commanders through pla
ns, directives and orders. 
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Campaign Rhythm 
the regular recurring sequence of events and actions, harmonised across a Joint force, 
to regulate and maintain control of a cam
paign.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Civil-Military Cooperation 
the process whereby the relationship between military and civilian sectors is 
addressed, with the aim of enab
ling a more coherent military contribution to the 
achievement of UK and/or international objectives.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition) 
Centre of Gravity 
characteristic, capability, or influence from which a nation, an alliance, a military 
force or other civil or militia grouping draws its freedom of action, physical strength, 
cohesion or will to fight.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Coalition 
an ad hoc arrangement between two or more nations for common action.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Combat Identification 
the process of combining situational awareness, target identification, specific tactics, 
training and procedures to increase operational effectiveness of weapon systems and 
reduce the incidence of casualties caused by friendly fire.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Command 
the authority vested in an individual to influence events and to order subordinates to 
implement decisions.  
Note: It comprises 3 closely inter-related elements: leadership, decision-making 
(including risk assessment) and control.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
 
Commander’s Intent 
a concise and precise statement of what a JFC intends to do and why, focused on the 
overall effect the Joint Force is to have an
d the desired situation it aims to bring about.  
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-7 3rd Edition Change 1  
Components 
force elements grouped under one or more component commanders subordinate to the 
operational level commander.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition) 
Consequence Management 
the process by which a headquarters plans for, and reacts to, the consequences of 
incidents and events which have a direct physical or psychological effect on people.  
(JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition Change 1) 
Contingency Plan 
a plan which is developed for possible operations where the planning factors have 
identified or can be assumed.  This plan is produced in as much detail as p
ossible, 
including the resources needed and deployment options, as a basis for subsequent 
planning.  (AAP-6) 
Contingency Planning 
planning, in advance, for potential military activity in the future.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition)  
 
Contingents 
force elements of one nation grouped under one or more m
ultinational component 
commanders subordinate to the Joint Task Force Commander.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Control 
the coordination of activity, through processes and structures that enable a commander 
to manage risk and to deliver intent.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Crisis Management 
the process of preventing, containing or resolving crises before they develop into 
armed conflict, while simultaneously planning for possible escalation.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Crisis Response Planning 
planning, often at short notice, to determine an appropriate military response to a 
current or imminent crisis.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Current Operations Planning 
planning to manage a current operation, to prevent escal
ation, and to sustain the 
necessary military activity to achieve the desired outcome.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Decisive Condition 
a specific combination of circumstances deemed necessary to achieve a campaign 
objective.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-8 3rd Edition Change 1  
Desired Outcome 
a favorable and enduring situation, consistent with political direction, reached through 
intervention and/or as a result of some other form of influence.  It invariably requires 
contributions from all instruments of power; it should be determined collectively.  
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Directive 
a military communication in which policy is established or a specific action is ordered.   
(AAP-6) 
 
Domain 
there are 3 Domains: 
1.  Physical Domain.  The sphere in which physical activity occurs and where the 
principal effects generated are upon capability. 
2.  Virtual Domain.  The sphere in which intangible activity occurs, such as the 
generation, maintenance and transfer of information.  The principal effects generated 
are upon understandi
ng. 
3.  Cognitive Domain.  The sphere in which human decision-making occurs as a 
result of assimilating knowledge acquired through thought, experience and sense.  The 
principal effects generated are upon will and understanding.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Note: The internet is part of the virtual domain. 
Essential Elements of Friendly Information 
items of critical exploitable information, concerning friendly dispositions, intentions, 
capabilities, morale, knowledge and potential vulnerabilities that, if compromised, 
could threaten the success of friendly forces.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Fires 
the deliberate use of physical and virtual means to support the realisation of, primarily, 
physical effects.  (JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition, Change 1) 
Force Protection 
the coordinated measures by which threats and hazards to the Joint Force are 
countered and mitigated in order to maintain an operating environment that enables the 
joint commander the freedom to employ joint action.  (JDP 0-01.1 8th Edition) 
Framework Nation 
forces generated under a ‘framework nation’ are commanded by an officer from that 
nation, which also provides a significant proportion of the staff and support to the 
headquarters. (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Note: The framework nation is also likely to dictate the language and procedures 
adopted. 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-9 3rd Edition Change 1  
Full Spectrum Targeting 
a holistic approach to targeting, reviewing all targets together and apportioning action 
(lethal and non-lethal) in accordance with the campaign information strategy and desired 
behavioural objectives.  (JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition, Change 1) 
Influence Activities 
the capability, or perceived capacity, to affect the character or behaviour of someone 
or something.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Information Management 
the integrated management processes and services that provide exploitable information 
on time, in the right place and format, to maximise freedom of action.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Information Strategy 
coordinated information output of all government activity, undertaken to influence 
approved audiences in support of policy objectives.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Intelligence 
the directed and coordinated acquisition and analysis of information to assess 
capabilities, intent and opportunities for national exploitation by leaders at all levels to 
further the national interest.  (JDP 0-01.1 8th Edition) 
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance 
the activities that synchronises and integrates the planning and operation of collection 
capabilities, including the processing and dissemination of the resulting product.   
(JDP 0-01.1 8th Edition) 
Joint 
adjective used to describe activities, operations and organisations in which elements of 
at least two Services participate.  (AAP-6) 
Joint Action 
the deliberate use an
d orchestration of military capabilities and activities to realise 
effects on an actor’s will, understanding and capability, and the cohesion between 
them to achieve influence.  (JDP 3-00 3rd Edition, Change 1) 
Joint Commander 
the Joint Commander, appointed by CDS, exercises the highest level of operational 
command of forces assigned with specific responsibility for deployments, sustainment 
and recovery.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-10 3rd Edition Change 1  
Joint Coordination Board 
the Joint Coordination Board (JCB) is an operation synchronisation meeting used to 
promulgate the JTFC’s guidance and objectives to component commanders.  It is his 
method of ensuring unity of effort.  The board will review the Joint Integrated Prioritised 
Target List to ensure that it reflects the JTFC’s Campaign Plan and is in line with Her 
Majesty’s Government objectives.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Joint Effects Meeting 
the Joint Effects Meeting is a staffing board whose role is to ensure that the Joint Fires 
process (which includes targeting) takes full account of the JTFC’s prioritised objectives 
within the overall campaign plan.  It is also responsible for the coordination and de-
confliction of JTFC controlled assets.  It will produce the daily Target Nomination List 
from the Joint Integrated Prioritised Target List for later approval by the Joint Co-
ordination Board.  (JDP 0-01.1) 
Joint Force Planning Group 
the Joint
 Force Planning Group, attended by the Joint Force Commander and normally 
chaired by his COS, is the forum where progress against the Campaign Plan is analysed 
and measured.  From this assessment will come direction on contingency planning that 
can be undertaken to capitalise on favourable developments or indeed help to offset or 
overcome setbacks.  (JDP 0-01.1) 
Joint Force 
a force composed of significant elements of two or more Services operating under a 
single commander authorised to exercise operational command or control.  (JDP 0-01.1) 
Joint Force Commander 
a general term applied to a commander authorised to exercise operational command or 
control over a Joint force.  (JDP 0-01.1) 
Joint Integrated Prioritised Target List 
a prioritised list of targets, approved by the Joint Task Force Commander and maintained 
by a joint task force, which includes the Component Commanders’ requirements.   
(JDP 0-01.1) 
Joint Integrated Target List 
a list of strategic and operational targets, coordinated by the PJHQ, to meet the Joint 
Commander’s objectives.  (JDP 0-01.1) 
Joint Operations Area 
an area of land, sea and airspace defined by a higher authority, in which a designated 
Joint Task Force Commander plans and conducts military operations to accomplish a 
specific mission.  A Joint Operations Area including its defining parameters, such as 
time, scope and geographic area, is contingency/mission specific.  (JDP 0-01.1) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-11 3rd Edition Change 1  
Joint Targeting 
the process of determining the effects necessary to achieve the commander’s objectives, 
identifying the actions necessary to create the desired effects based on means available, 
selecting and prioritising targets, and the synchronisation of fires with other military 
capabilities and then assessing their cumulative effectiveness and taking remedial action 
if necessary.  (AJP-3.9) 
Lead Nation 
forces generated under a lead nation are commanded by an officer from that nation, 
from his own Joint Force Headquarters (augmented with Liaison Officers, and 
potentially staff officers, from across the multinational force).  The lead nation is 
responsible for planning and executing the operation, to which others contribute 
National Contingents and National Contingent Commanders.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Lines or Groupings of Operation 
in a campaign or operation, a line or grouping linking Decisive Conditions, and hence  
Campaign Objectives, in time and space on the path to the Campaign End-state.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Manoeuvre 
the coordinated activities necessary to gain advantage within a situation in time and 
space.  (JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition Change 1) 
Manoeuvrist Approach 
an approach to operations in which shattering the enemy’s overall cohesion and will to 
fight is paramount.  It calls for an attitude of mind in which doing the unexpected, using 
initiative and seeking originality is combined with a ruthless determination to succeed.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Measurement of Activity 
assessment of the performance of a task and achievement of its associated purpose.  (JDP 
0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Measurement of Effect 
asse
ssment of the realisation of specified effects.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Mission Command 
a style of command that seeks to convey understanding to subordinates about intentions 
of the higher commander and their place within his plan, enabling them to carry out 
missions with maximum freedom of action and appropriate resources.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-12 3rd Edition Change 1  
Multi-agency 
activities or operations in which multiple agencies, including national, international and 
non-state organisations and other actors, participate in the same or overlapping areas 
with varying degrees of inter-agency cooperation.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Multinational 
adjective used to describe activities, operations and organisations, in which forces or 
agencies of more than one nation participate.  See also Joint.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition) 
Non-Governmental Organisation 
a voluntary, non-profit making organisation that is generally independent of government, 
international organisations or commercial interests.  The organisation will write its own 
charter and mission.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Operating Space 
all aspects of a Joint Operations Area within which activities, both military and non-
military, take place.  See also Joint Operations Area.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Operation Order 
a directive, usually formal, issued by a commander to subordinate commanders for the 
purpose of effecting the coordinated execution of an operation.  (AAP-6) 
Operation Plan 
a plan for a single or series of connected operations to be carried out simultaneously or 
in succession.  It is usually based upon stated assumptions and is the form of directive 
employed by higher authority to permit subordinate commanders to prepare supporting 
plans and orders.  The designation ‘plan’ is usually used instead of ‘order’ in preparing 
for operations well in advance.  An operation plan may be put into effect at a 
prescribed time, or on signal, and then becomes the operation order.  (AAP-6) 
Operational Analysis 
the use of mathematical, statistical and other forms of analysis to explore situations 
and to help decision-makers resolve problems.  Facts and probabilities are processed 
into manageable patterns relevant to the likely consequences of alternative courses of 
action.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition) 
Operational Art 
the orchestration of a campaign, in concert with other agencies, involved in converting 
strategic objectives into tactical activity in order to achieve a desired outcome.  (JDP 
01 2nd Edition) 
Operational Level 
the level of warfare at which campaigns are planned, conducted and sustained to  
accomplish strategic objectives and synchronise action, within theatres or areas of 
operation.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-13 3rd Edition Change 1  
Operations Security 
the discipline which gives a military operation or exercise appropriate security, using 
active or passive means, to deny a target decision-maker knowledge of essential 
elements of friendly information.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Reachout 
access to external expertise, information or functions.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
 
Situational Awareness 
1. generically, the understanding of the operational environment in the context of a 
commander’s ( or staff officer) mission (or task). 
2. in intelligence usage, situational awareness is the ability to identify trends and 
linkages over time, and to relate these to what is happening and what is not 
happening.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Strategic Communication (in Defence) 
advancing national interests by using all defence means of communication to influence 
the attitudes and behaviours of people.  (JDP 0-01 8th Edition) 
Success Criteria 
criteria identifying achievement of success.  (JDP 3-00, 3rd Edition, Change 1) 
Note: They consist of statements, supported by quantifiable objectives, and may be 
time-related, or more likely, conditions-based. 
Supported Commander 
a commander having primary responsibility for all aspects of a task assigned by a higher 
authority.  See also Supporting Commander.  (JDP 0-01.1, 7th Edition) 
Supporting Effect 
the intended consequence of actions.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Supporting Commander 
a commander who furnishes forces, equipment, logistics or other support to a 
supported commander, or who develops a supporting plan.  See also Supported 
Commander.  (AAP-6) 
Target 
the object of a particular action, for example a geographic area, a complex, an 
installation, a force, equipment, an individual, a group or a system, planned for 
capture, exploitation, neutralisation or destruction by military forces.  (AAP-6) 
Targeting 
the process of selecting targets and matching the appropriate responses to them, taking 
account of the operational requirements and capabilities.  (AAP-6) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

  JDP 3-00 
 Lexicon-14 3rd Edition Change 1  
Theatre of Operations 
a geographical area, or more precisely a space, defined by the military-strategic 
authority, which includes and surrounds the area delegated to a Joint Force 
Commander (termed the Joint Operations Area), within which he conducts operations.  
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Threshold 
the criteria identifying progress.  (JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
Time Sensitive Targets 
those targets requiring immediate response because they represent a serious and 
imminent threat to friendly forces or are high pay-off, fleeting targets of opportunity.  
In practice TST are specific target sets designated by the JFC.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
 
Understanding 
the perception and interpretation of a particular situation in order to provide the 
context, insight and foresight required for effective decision-making.   
(JDP 0-01.1, 8th Edition) 
ARCHIVED
The content of this publication was incorporated into 
AJP-3, Allied joint doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (Edition C) 
published by NATO in February 2019 
 
It is no longer authoritative and has been archived 

