Understanding and Decision-making Joint Doctrine Publication 04Second Edition
perspective
bias
team
information
thinking
engagement
learning
trust
culture
communication
consequences
network
adaptation
knowledge
command
Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Understanding and Decision-making
Joint Doctrine Publication 04 
Second Edition


Joint Doctrine Publication 04
Understanding and Decision-making
Joint Doctrine Publication 04 (JDP 04) (2nd Edition),
dated December 2016, 
is promulgated 
as directed by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Concepts and Doctrine
i
Conditions of release
1. This information is Crown copyright.  The Ministry of Defence (MOD) exclusively
owns the intellectual property rights for this publication.  You are not to forward,
reprint, copy, distribute, reproduce, store in a retrieval system, or transmit its
information outside the MOD without VCDS’ permission.
2. This information may be subject to privately owned rights.

ii
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
Authorisation
 
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for publishing 
strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine.  If you wish to quote our publications 
as reference material in other work, you should confirm with our editors whether the 
particular publication and amendment state remains authoritative.  We welcome your 
comments on factual accuracy or amendment proposals.  Please send them to:
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Ministry of Defence Shrivenham 
SWINDON, 
Wiltshire, 
SN6 8RF 
Telephone:                  01793 31 4216/4217/4220  
Military network:      96161 4216/4217/4220  
E-mail:       DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk 
All images, or otherwise stated are: © Crown copyright/MOD 2016. 
Distribution
 
The distribution of Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 04 (2nd Edition) is managed by the 
Forms and Publications Section, LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre, C16 Site, 
Ploughley Road, Arncott, Bicester, OX25 1LP .  All of our other publications, including 
a regularly updated DCDC Publications Disk, can also be demanded from the LCSLS 
Operations Centre. 
LCSLS Help Desk:    01869 256197
Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on the Defence Intranet (RLI) at: 
http://defenceintranet.diif.r.mil.uk/Organisations/Orgs/JFC/Organisations/Orgs/DCDC  
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
iii
Abstract
Purpose
1.  The purpose of Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 04, Understanding and  
Decision-making is to provide context and guidance on understanding and  
decision-making for operations.  It discusses how and why developing and 
maintaining understanding contributes to success and its contribution to effective 
decision-making.
Context
2. Recent operations have highlighted the vital part understanding plays in the 
eventual success or failure of operations.  One of the major themes of the Report of 
the Iraq Inquiry highlighted the lack of understanding of the operating environment 
in Iraq which meant that ‘the Government was unprepared for the role in which it 
found itself from April 2003.  Much of what went wrong stemmed from that lack of 
preparation'.1  JDP 04 seeks to place into context the importance of understanding 
and decision-making when conducting operations and highlights the challenges that 
commanders and staff will encounter in these topics. 
Scope
3.  JDP 04 outlines understanding generally and understanding the operating 
environment more specifically.  It also outlines the conceptual frameworks for 
thinking, problem solving and choosing and building the right team.
4.  JDP 04 is, for the most part, theoretical.  However, it introduces the reader 
to several tools and frameworks which can be applied in practice.  These tools 
are developed further in North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and national 
functional doctrine.  
Audience
5.  The audience for JDP 04 is military commanders and their respective staffs who 
are (or will become) involved in operations as well as policy and strategy makers in 
the Ministry of Defence.  The secondary audience is members of other government 
departments, related non-governmental organisations and the private sector, with 
whom the military are likely to work.
1 The Report of the Iraq Inquiry Executive Summary , HMSO, 2016.  Commonly referred to as the ‘Chilcot 
Report ’. 


iv
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
Structure
6. JDP 04 consists of two chapters.
a. Chapter 1 – Understanding introduces the basics of understanding, how 
to approach understanding in the operating environment, factors bearing on 
developing understanding and what enables understanding.  It is supported 
with an annex to guide readers on developing understanding.
b. Chapter 2 – Decision-making begins by introducing a theoretical  
concept for thinking.  It then develops ideas about the factors relating to 
problem solving and how and why we think the way we do.  The chapter then 
discusses building effective teams and concludes with advice for commanders.  
It is supported by two annexes on organisational learning and adaptation, and 
biases and heuristics.
Linkages
7. JDP 04 is a thematic national keystone doctrine publication that sits below  
JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine and alongside JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine.   
JDP 04 also links to NATO and national doctrine publications and these are referenced 
in the text. 


JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
v
Contents
Abstract  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   iii
Chapter 1 – Understanding .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
Chapter 2 – Decision-making .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   35


[Page 7: No extractable text]

Understanding
Chapter 1 introduces the basics of understanding, how to 
approach understanding in the operating environment, 
factors bearing on developing understanding and what 
enables understanding.  It is supported with an annex to 
guide readers on developing understanding.
Chapter 1
1
JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
1
Section 1 – The need to understand  . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – The basics of understanding  . . . . . . . 7
Section 3 – Understanding the operating  
                       environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Section 4 – Factors that affect the development  
                       of understanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Section 5 – Enabling understanding  . . . . . . . . . . 27
Annex 1A – A guide for developing  
                       understanding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

2
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
Section 1 – The need to understand
Chapter 1 – Understanding
”
“ Our species needs, and deserves, a 
citizenry with minds wide awake and 
a basic understanding of how the 
world works.
 
Carl Sagan 
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
3
1
Section 1 – The need to understand
Chapter 1 – Understanding
1.1.  Understanding is defined as: t he perception and interpretation of a particular 
situation in order to provide the context, insight and foresight required for effective 
decision-making. 1  Understanding helps us to make decisions; it also helps us to 
manage any associated risks and any second and subsequent order effects.  
The relationship between understanding, power and influence
1.2.  In Defence, understanding underpins everything that we do.  Understanding:
• informs our choices when developing state policy and strategy; 
• supports the application of national power to achieve influence; and
• is a pre-requisite for effective decision-making.  
Understanding helps us to identify the causes of conflict, the nature of emerging 
crises, and the context required for determining deterrence, coercion or response 
postures.
Power  
1.3.  The national instruments of power are diplomatic, economic and military, 
all underpinned by information.  Hard power is defined as: the threat or use of 
military or economic coercion or physical action to achieve influence.2  Hard power 
is, however, only effective if it is credible.  Soft power is defined as: the ability to 
persuade or encourage others to adopt an alternative approach.3  Soft power may 
be used to influence others to adopt a preferred course of action through cultural 
and ideological means.  By combining hard and soft power – sometimes referred to 
as ‘smart power’ – nations maintain their legitimate interests or demonstrate their 
values.4
1 Concise Oxford English Dictionary , 12th Edition, 2011.
2 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 04, Understanding , 2010.
3 Ibid.
4 JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine , 5th Edition .
Understanding

4
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
Influence  
1.4. Influence is defined as: the capacity to have an effect on the character, or 
behaviour of someone or something or the effect itself. 5  Defence contributes 
significantly in supporting the Government’s policy aim of influencing the behaviour 
of any group, nation or state that threatens the UK’s interests.  However, to be 
successful in achieving this, we need to:
• make sure we are credible in our words and actions;
• use understanding to help us identify both who we need to influence, and 
how we might achieve that; and
• develop common understanding with those we work alongside.
The national perspective 
1.5. Understanding enables a global perspective, which supports the UK’s role as a 
global actor.  Our interests are defined in the National Security Strategy and Strategic 
Defence and Security Review 2015, which identifies our national security objectives as: 
• protecting our people;
• projecting global influence; and
• promoting our prosperity.6
Understanding helps us to avert or mitigate crises through identifying and enabling 
an early response to any threats to our legitimate interests.  
1.6. The national perspective informs how Defence is configured and prepared, 
including how we develop our understanding and ability to operate with others to 
support national interests.  However, global influences, including social, political, 
economic and cultural trends will also have an influence, so Defence cannot rely 
solely on its own perspective for understanding.  Therefore, understanding should 
always be formed with the widest appropriate inputs to ensure we have the most 
comprehensive picture possible.  
Defence support to national understanding  
1.7. National strategy provides guidance to Defence so we can make decisions 
for preparing, positioning and employing military capability.  This demands that 
5 Concise Oxford English Dictionary , 12th Edition, 2011.
6 National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015: A Secure and Prosperous United 
Kingdom.
Understanding 
enables 
a global 
perspective, 
which 
supports the 
UK’s role as a 
global actor.  
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
5
1
we understand foreign policy and home defence requirements, and we have the 
required force structures we need to meet them.  National strategy also guides 
the intelligence efforts required to identify emerging threats.  Commanders 
must base their decisions within the context of the national strategy, including 
considering threats to international security, foreign policy and the UK’s obligations.  
Understanding is necessary at all levels of command, because tactical activity can 
create strategic effect.
1.8.  Defence is well-placed to contribute to national understanding.  Defence 
support to national understanding falls into five broad categories.
a. Horizon scanning.   Horizon scanning is defined as: systematic search across 
the global environment for potential threats, hazards and opportunities. 7  
Horizon scanning helps identify weaknesses in current assessments or policies, 
but it may not be sufficiently detailed to enable tasking requirements.  At the 
national level, horizon scanning is led by the Cabinet Office.  
b.  Situational awareness.   Situational awareness is defined as: generically, 
the understanding of the operational environment in the context of a 
commander’s (or staff officer’s) mission (or task). 8  It is how Defence perceives 
a particular area of interest, problem or situation bounded by time and space 
in the context of a mission or task.  Situational awareness provides the ability 
to identify what has happened and is happening, but not necessarily why  it 
has happened.  At the operational and tactical levels, commanders require 
situational awareness to analyse problems.  Commanders and staff require 
situational awareness in sufficient detail and currency to support effective and 
timely analysis and, hence, make effective and timely decisions.  
c. Support to policy, strategy and planning formulation.  Understanding 
is essential for the formulation of effective policy and strategy and for the 
effective deployment of national resources.  By setting the parameters for 
framing problems, understanding helps us to identify where there are gaps in 
our knowledge and determines where additional resources are required.
d. Contingency planning.   Contingency planning is conducted within 
the Ministry of Defence (MOD) and military headquarters to prepare for 
potential military operations in areas of UK interest.  Contingency planning 
provides commanders with a range of potential options which might have to 
be executed.  Good contingency planning promotes proactive, rather than 
reactive, responses. 
7 JDP 04, Understanding , 2010.  For more information on global trends see Development, Concepts and 
Doctrine Centre (DCDC), Global Strategic Trends – Out to 2045 , 5th Edition , 2014.
8 JDP 04, Understanding , 2010.
Understanding is  
essential for the 
formulation of 
effective policy 
and strategy.
”
“
Understanding

6
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
e. Defence Engagement.  The UK maintains Defence assets designed to deliver 
hard power to defend the national interest.  However, Defence assets have wider 
utility in maintaining our security and prosperity beyond the threat or use of 
hard power.  Defence Engagement is defined as: the means by which we use our 
Defence assets and activities, short of combat operations, to achieve influence.9  
Defence Engagement allows the military (alongside other instruments of 
national power) to play a part in shaping the environment, promoting the 
rules-based international order and preventing instability in support of the UK’s 
security and prosperity.  This is done while building Defence’s understanding of 
the world.  Defence Engagement enhances our understanding of other nations, 
their cultures and their strengths and weaknesses by: 
 Ĕ developing links with other nations’ militaries;
 Ĕ strengthening alliances; and
 Ĕ promoting the credibility of the UK within the international system 
through professional competence.
9 Joint Doctrine Note (JDN) 1/15, Defence Engagement .
Defence Engagement includes working with other nations' militaries
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
7
1
Section 2 – The basics of understanding
1.9.  Understanding falls into three types.  These are individual understanding, 
collective understanding and common understanding, which are explored below.
a. Individual understanding  is defined as: the personal interpretation of the 
facts held by a person within their own mind. 10  Individual understanding 
(even of the same problem) will inevitably vary across a group or population.  
Individual understanding is prone to being shaped by personal experience.  
Peer pressure can also affect individual understanding.
b.  Collective understanding  is defined as: t he shared perspective held by 
members of distinct groups that have their own ethos, creed and identity. 11  
Members of specific institutions or professions have collective understanding 
ranging from professional standards or methods, to generally held perceptions 
of the institution’s role in the world.  Collective understanding also arises in 
political, religious or ethnic groups.  Organisational cultures, rituals, stories and 
norms will shape collective understanding.
c. Common understanding  is defined as: the ability to comprehend 
perceptions of groups other than our own and to establish a common baseline 
for communication, interpretation and action. 12  Common understanding 
is achieved when institutions, professions, communities and other groups 
cooperate for a purpose, or to co-exist.  These groups may have different kinds 
of collective understanding that involves potentially divergent interpretations 
of the world and events, including views of one another.  Working within, 
between and across multiple groups with their different understanding 
provides opportunities to be exposed to divergent views.  Common 
understanding may be a settled compromise of different views.
Philosophy
1.10.  Our collective understanding dictates how we develop our attitudes and 
opinions and how we behave or operate.  It is our responsibility as individuals, as 
single Services and as professionals to understand ourselves, the world around us, 
and our potential adversaries.  Understanding is one of the cornerstones of our 
10  JDP 04, Understanding,  2010.
11  Ibid.
12  Ibid.
Understanding

8
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
military philosophy and we must want to understand.  This philosophy embraces two 
principles.
a. A professional approach.  Experience and knowledge, including the body 
of professional knowledge enshrined in doctrine, together with education and 
training, underpin effective understanding.  This enhances both our ability to 
make timely and effective decisions and to take measured risk.  We must seek 
knowledge, consider all available information sources (especially if they hold 
views opposed to our own) and conduct self-study as well as formal education 
and training.
b. A proactive approach to sharing information.  Understanding depends 
on access to information and knowledge, but access is often problematic, 
particularly in the intelligence field where sources must be protected.  The 
need for security may restrict information sharing, even when much of the 
same intelligence can be gleaned from open-source material; security caveats 
only apply once information is interpreted.  The impact of any caveats may 
decrease as an environment and approach is created that enables intelligence 
sharing with those who need it.
(1) Sharing requires applying judgement, particularly regarding 
classification, and must be built upon trust.  
(2) Sharing is resource intensive, requiring investment in information 
management and exchange systems, and relevant training.  Being 
proactive is also an attitude of mind, and the approach to information may 
also extend to fostering individual, collective and common contacts. 
1.11. Understanding has a number of meanings depending upon the context 
in which it is used and the communities or institutions which develop it.  Military 
understanding relates to what military forces need to understand to complete their 
missions, deliver operational success and, when necessary, identify, monitor and 
defeat adversaries. 
Understanding is one of the cornerstones of our 
military philosophy and it embraces two principles: a 
professional approach and a proactive approach to sharing 
information.
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
9
1
Insight, foresight and hindsight 
   
1.12.  Understanding involves acquiring and developing knowledge to a level that 
enables us to know why something has happened or is happening (insight) and be 
able to identify and anticipate what may happen (foresight).  
a. Insight.  Developing understanding requires situational awareness to 
identify the problem.  By analysing the context we can gain greater insight of 
the problem; applying judgement to this insight then generates understanding 
and in so doing may tell us why the situation has developed.  
b.  Foresight.  Foresight will never be complete, but improving both the 
quality and analysis of our information will help to refine it. 
1.13.  Many decisions (especially those that are new or novel) can only be assessed 
with hindsight  (understanding a situation or event only after it has happened).  We 
should be careful to avoid using hindsight to support any claim that we ‘knew’ 
an outcome was inevitable (this is a very common mistake).  Commanders should 
consider historic situations with outwardly similar parameters when framing new 
problems, but treat them with caution; while history may appear to recur, it never 
repeats.15
13  J Dewey, How We Think , 1933.
14  G Wiggin and J McTighe, Understanding by Design , Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development, Alexandria, United States, 2005.
15  The phrase ‘history does not repeat itself, but it rhymes’ is commonly attributed to Mark Twain, the 
American writer.
‘To grasp the meaning of a thing, an event, or a situation is to see it in its relation to other 
things: to see how it operates or functions, what consequences follow from it, what causes 
it, what uses it can be put to.  In contrast, what we have called the brute thing, the thing 
without meaning to us, is something whose relations are not grasped. . .  The relation of 
means-consequence is the center and heart of all understanding.’13
‘To know which fact to use when requires more than another fact.  It requires 
understanding – insight into essentials, purpose, audience, strategy, and tactics.  Drill and 
direct instruction can develop discrete skills and facts into automaticity (knowing “by 
heart”), but they cannot make us truly able.’14
Napoleon Bonaparte 
‘Forethought we may have, undoubtedly, but not foresight.’
Understanding

10
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
Understanding and knowledge
1.14. Knowledge comprises the information and skills acquired through experience 
or education.  Understanding, however, is about applying judgement to both 
make sense of, and recognise the significance of, facts in a given context.  Table 1.1 
illustrated the differences between knowledge and understanding. 
Knowledge Understanding
•   The facts •   The meaning of the facts
•   A body of coherent facts •   The ‘theory’ that provides coherence and 
    meaning to those facts
•   Verifiable claims •   Fallible, in-process theories
•   Right or wrong •   A matter of degree or sophistication
•   I know something to be true •   I understand why it is, what makes it  
    knowledge
•   I respond on cue with what I know •   I judge when to, and when not to, use  
    what I know
Table 1.1 – The difference between knowledge and understanding
1.16. Understanding requires the ability to transfer what we have learned to new 
and sometimes confusing settings.  The ability to transfer our knowledge and skills 
effectively, and on our own, involves the capacity to take what we know and use 
it creatively, flexibly and fluently, in different settings or to different problems.  
Transferability is not merely ‘plugging in’ of previously learned knowledge and skills.16  
Understanding – time and consequences
1.17. Building understanding takes time, and commanders may not have a 
comprehensive understanding at the outset of a crisis.  While knowledge derived 
from information is a key source for building understanding, commanders should 
remain flexible and adaptive enough to consider views from a range of experts.  
16 Op. Cit., G Wiggin and J McTighe, Understanding by Design .
You know that running 100 metres in under six seconds is fast.  If you were told 
that Jenny was capable of achieving this time, you may be amazed: you may 
even discount this as a fact.  If you were told that Jenny is a cheetah, you would 
understand the facts in context.
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
11
1
1.18.  As factors including the context, the role of actors, politics and power can 
change over time, understanding is perishable.  Evolving situations can present 
a challenge if insufficient time is available to develop, analyse or refresh our 
understanding.  Commanders may have limited time to develop their understanding 
and accept that their responses to situations in an unfamiliar environment may result 
in greater risk, negative consequences or missed opportunities.  This highlights the 
importance of recognising intended and unintended consequences, and the need to 
learn and adapt to improve our understanding.
a. Intended and unintended consequences.   Potential consequences may 
be foreseen during planning in the form of best or worst case scenarios, and 
contingency plans developed accordingly.  Unforeseen consequences will 
need to be addressed as they arise.  Commanders should note that unintended 
consequences are not always negative and may provide opportunities for 
exploitation; understanding will enable opportunities to be seized.
b.  The need to learn and adapt.  Learning and adapting allows us to develop 
our understanding more quickly to account for the changing situation.  
Learning and adapting also enables: 
 Ĕ reduced likelihood of negative consequences; 
 Ĕ better mitig ation of unforeseen consequences; 
 Ĕ more effective exploitation; and 
 Ĕ our ability to influence.  
Developing a command cultu re that embraces a culture of learning and 
adaptation requires commanders to be both open-minded and able to learn 
from their own mistakes, as well as allowing their subordinates to make their 
own mistakes. 
1.19.  To develop understanding, commanders must clearly articulate their 
requirements.  Commanders may have direction from a higher authority that frames 
thinking about a problem, and this will influence their intelligence requirements.  A 
commander’s own knowledge, analytical skills and the command climate they foster 
each shape the level of understanding that will be achieved.  Commanders should ask 
the following questions as a situation develops:
• what do we want to understand; 
• how soon do we need to understand;
• what do we know; 
• what are the potential gaps in our knowledge;
• how do we fill those gaps; 
To  develop 
understanding, 
commanders 
must  clearly 
articulate their  
requirements. 
”
“
Understanding

12
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
• how do we achieve continuity; and
• how do we improve the level of detail?
Annex 1A provides a summary of how to develop understanding.
The competitive nature of understanding  
1.20. An inherent characteristic of understanding is its competitive nature.  This may 
involve individuals and groups competing for the primacy of their own individual 
or collective understanding.  This applies equally to our own internal collective 
and common understanding, as much as it does to our allies’, other government 
departments’, host nation’s or our adversaries’ understanding.  However, commanders 
should guard against thinking of understanding as a finite resource.  Understanding 
is not a zero-sum commodity, where if someone understands, someone else does not.  
1.21. Deployed commanders may have to overcome the relative advantages in 
understanding enjoyed by local actors.  Individuals or groups may compete for 
authority over, or ownership of, various information or knowledge sources that 
contribute to understanding.  This places an emphasis on developing networks 
together with the requirement to share information when practicable.  
The concept of the narrative
1.22. Narratives are spoken or written accounts of events.  Narratives can dominate 
collective thought, and once ingrained can be very hard to shift.  Moreover, narratives 
can be formed by imagination, myth and stories rather than fact, especially over 
time.  The concept of the narrative can play a significant role in understanding; 
understanding the nuances that have contributed to widely-held beliefs can be very 
difficult to achieve.    
1.23. Based on their comprehensive understanding of the situation, our adversaries 
will seek influence among local, regional and world audiences through their own 
narrative.  Our narrative may be so different to our adversaries’ narrative, they may 
never be reconciled.  This is commonly termed ‘competing narratives’.  This places a 
premium on our ability to understand how people think, recognising both individual 
and cultural differences.  Therefore, we may need to develop culturally-sensitive 
narratives that may not be our preferred option.
1.24. Some actors or groups will see any form of external intervention as an affront, 
complicating our ability to challenge a competing narrative.  While competing 
narratives may never be fully reconciled, understanding (and much more importantly, 
not misunderstanding) can help us to identify common ground.  
Understanding 
is competitive.  
It is not a  
zero-sum 
commodity, 
where if 
someone 
understands, 
someone else 
does not.
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
13
1
Misunderstanding
1.25.  Misunderstanding differs from not understanding.  Misunderstanding 
may occur between actors; it is easy to interpret information based on your own 
heuristics, 17 biases and experience to make sense of them, but these may differ from 
another’s.  As misunderstanding often arises from making incorrect conclusions, 
misunderstanding may result from difficulties in communicating.  Using common 
languages, narratives, agreed lexicons and shared doctrines can help to overcome 
these difficulties.  Genuine misunderstanding should not be reprimanded – making 
sense of, and fusing, numerous facts in complex environments is not easy.
1.26.  Language, and how we use it to articulate ideas, has a strong influence on 
perception and understanding.  Specialist language may help to reduce ambiguity 
and can allow communication to be more precise, but it relies on a common 
understanding.  Therefore, specialist language can be unintelligible to those not used 
to using it.  Non-verbal communication, ‘body language’, is equally as susceptible to 
(sometime very subtle) cultural nuances that can impede understanding.  
1. 27.  Successful communication 
depends ultimately on our ability 
to understand what is meant rather 
than what is said.  The military in 
particular tend to be opaque to other 
organisations through over-use of 
specialist language and acronyms.  
Commanders must be aware of this 
tendency and encourage the use of 
plain, concise language, particularly 
in multinational and multi-agency 
environments.
17  Heuristics are rules of thumb learned through experience, trial and error, or discovering something 
for yourself.  They can be useful short-cut methods, but applicability is not universal, especially when we 
assume that the factors underlying a previous event are the same for the present situation and that the 
past solutions can be applied to new problems.
Bridging language gaps to avoid misunderstanding is vital
The Light That Failed, 
Rudyard Kipling 
‘We're all islands shouting lies to each other across seas of misunderstanding.’ 
Understanding

14
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
The principles of understanding
1.28. The principles of understanding detailed below aim to improve awareness 
of our own strengths, weaknesses and biases.  They also promote our capacity to 
recognise and consider the views of other actors and the need to think creatively and 
open-mindedly about problems.  
a. Self-awareness.  We should be aware of why or how we know something 
(as opposed to thinking something) and the limitations to certainty that 
knowing entails.  Subconscious knowledge may be so engrained that it is 
difficult for us to both recognise and assess it.  We should regularly audit 
our knowledge for its assumptions, origins and composition, taking into 
consideration our own biases and perceptions.
b. Critical analysis.  Critical analysis is defined as: the intellectual discipline 
that applies deliberate introspective judgement to interpret, analyse and 
evaluate a problem and explain the context upon which that judgement is 
based.18  Critical analysis is subject to the same biases and perceptions as those 
inherent in developing understanding and it relies on intellectual integrity.  
Tools such as creating analogies and red teaming should be used as common 
practice to encourage individuals and groups to apply critical analysis.
c. Creative thinking.  Creative thinking is defined as: the examination 
of problems or situations from an original or unorthodox perspective.19  
Background, training and experience can often create conditional thinking, 
which may be prejudicial to critical analysis.  Creative thinking should be 
encouraged to examine a situation from a fresh perspective and to create 
imaginative and competing hypotheses.  Hypotheses should be tested against 
existing information to deduce meaning, or to develop alternative solutions.  
d. Continuity.  In areas where change is slow, or the requirement is enduring, 
developing and maintaining understanding requires continuity in observation 
and expertise.  Achieving continuity requires us to: 
 Ĕ develop an effective network of sources to provide access to the 
knowledge needed; 
 Ĕ create a common way of storing and sharing knowledge; and 
 Ĕ share insight between relevant subject matter experts.  
18 JDP 04, Understanding , 2010.
19 Ibid.
Successful 
communication 
depends 
ultimately on 
our ability to 
understand 
what is meant.
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
15
1
Northern Ireland – how continuity helped to develop understanding
In 1969 the British military did not fully understand the nature of the situation in Northern 
Ireland.  Used to fighting insurgents in colonial campaigns, applying similar processes 
and tactics to Northern Ireland did not work.  By the early-1980s, however, through a 
process of learning and adapting, the military forces better understood the dynamics 
of the Province in terms of the roles played by individual and group actors, including 
paramilitary groups.  This understanding was supported by the police and the military 
working together to develop foresight about how particular communities and actors 
would react to certain events.  The police network, particularly the Special Branch, 
underpinned continuity of understanding, with the British Army working in support 
of the police (Royal Ulster Constabulary/Police Service of Northern Ireland) under the 
legal arrangements of military assistance to the civil power.  A further pillar was the 
Ulster Defence Regiment (later the Royal Irish Regiment) who lived and worked amongst 
the community, and resident infantry battalions who served for two years to provide 
continuity.   
Units on six-month tours often completed tours in the same locations, such as South 
Armagh, and retained knowledge of actors that developed further with each deployment.  
In addition, the introduction of intelligence Continuity Non-commissioned Officers to 
overlap between six-month rotational units provided continuity of intelligence until the 
new unit intelligence section had assimilated the knowledge and experience of their 
predecessors.  Supporting intelligence 
staff also generally completed two to 
three year tours, as well as multiple tours.  
One further aspect of continuity was 
the training base; the highly successful 
Northern Ireland Training and Advisory 
Team in the UK and its subsidiary in 
Northern Ireland prepared all individuals 
and units for duty in the Province using 
veterans of multiple tours. 
Understanding

16
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
Working together 
1.29. Defence must work with departments from across government and engage 
across the full range of state and non-state actors.20  The Whole Force approach 
comprises a mix of regular, reserve, contractor and civil service personnel, each with 
different backgrounds, experiences and knowledge.  To ensure that our human 
capital is fully leveraged, and diverse thinking is captured, commanders must  
include all stakeholders in their analysis of problems and be open to new thinking.  
Working together may demand working with another nation’s information and 
intelligence agencies.  The ‘need to know’ principle endures, but a collaborative 
environment relies on information sharing (the ‘need to share’), underpinned by 
pragmatic risk-management.  Working together helps to build a collective narrative: 
however, commanders should be aware of the potential for groupthink21 resulting 
from working together, which may distort analysis.
1.30. Fusing22 information requires agreeing a common set of rules and procedures 
between the agencies involved.  A key element of fusion is the ability to corroborate 
sources or specific pieces of information.  Some information or intelligence will not be 
coherent.  The key to understanding is recognising why information that does not fit 
now may later take on significance.  Successful fusion is based on:
• interoperability through a number of organisations working together within 
a shared framework of understanding; and
• integration through the use of fully integrated systems with shared 
operating protocols and management.
Networking 
1.31. Networking is important to generate understanding and offers significant 
benefits including the potential for greater objectivity, burden sharing and 
innovation.  Networking also serves to engender trust and helps us identify common 
risks.  Successful networks combine the knowledge and experience of contributors 
and help to establish and maintain personal relationships.  Networks may develop 
naturally or through a deliberate process, and they may share information on a 
20 The current UK name for this is the ‘integrated approach’ – see JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine ,  
page 44; in the future this is likely to change to the 'full spectrum approach' – for more details see the Full 
Spectrum Approach Primer (due in March 2017) or Joint Doctrine Note X/17, Full Spectrum Approach  (due in 
May 2017).  In the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) it is ‘NATO’s contribution to a comprehensive 
approach’ – for more information see Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine.
21 See Chapter 2, paragraph 2.19.b.
22 Fusion is defined in Allied Administrative Publication (AAP)-06, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions 
as: in intelligence usage, the blending of intelligence and/or information from multiple sources or 
agencies into a coherent picture.  The origin of the initial individual items should then no longer be 
apparent.
Networking 
also serves to 
engender trust 
and helps 
us identify 
common risks.
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
17
1
regular basis without a firm agenda.  However, commanders should guide their staff 
on the need to balance less structured networking with the requirement for some 
discussion to be more formally documented.  Commanders should also remember 
that individuals representing intelligence agencies may face constraints on what they 
can contribute to understanding. 
Analysis
1.32.  Analysis is the detailed examination of something to help us interpret or 
explain it.  Analysis in itself is not understanding, but is an essential component in 
the process of converting situational awareness into understanding.  We can use 
analysis to evaluate information about the current and past behaviour of a state, 
system, organisation or individual.  Analysis tests and refines hypotheses about 
future behaviour, including responses to our behaviour, and enables decision-makers 
to evaluate potential courses of action as fully as possible.  The analysis process 
comprises the following stages.
a. Collation.   Collation is the first stage in analysis, grouping together related 
items of information or intelligence to provide a record of events and facilitate 
further processing.
b.  Evaluation.   Evaluation involves appraising an item of information in 
respect of the reliability and credibility of the source and the information.
c. Integration.   Integration involves a structured review to identify significant 
facts for subsequent interpretation using a variety of tools and techniques.  
The techniques chosen should ensure that the approach to a particular 
problem or issue is robust and not subject to cognitive or institutional biases. 
d. Interpretation.   Interpretation judges the significance of new information 
in relation to the current body of knowledge.  It is used to provide a final 
assessment and to integrate other relevant information or intelligence to 
identify patterns.
e.  Continuous review.   Understanding is continuous; therefore, the analysis 
from which it derives must also be continuous.  An assessment that is fixed in 
time has limited utility and a review process ensures that we will recognise, 
learn and adapt to changes in circumstances.  
Analysis in 
itself is not 
understanding, 
but is an 
essential 
component in 
the process 
of converting 
situational 
awareness into 
understanding.
”
“
Understanding

18
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
Analytical frameworks  
1.33. Analytical frameworks help us identify the context, social factors and 
stakeholders in a given situation.  When selecting an analytical framework, the focus 
must be on whether it provides the appropriate degree of detail.  The following 
frameworks help us to gain a wide perspective on problems.
a. PEST – political, economic, social and technological.
b. PESTLEI – political, economic, social, technological, legal, environmental 
and information.
c. PMESII (PT)23 – political, military, economic, social, infrastructure and 
information (physical terrain and time).  
d. STEEPLEM – social, technological, economic, environmental, political, legal, 
ethical and military.
e. ASCOPE – area, structure, capabilities, organisation, people and events. 
1.34. The operating environment is defined as: a composite of the conditions, 
circumstances and influences that affect the employment of capabilities and bear on 
the decisions of the commanders.24  Within the operating environment the nature of 
war remains constant, but the character of conflict itself changes.  Therefore, while 
we hope to learn from experience, this must be tempered by anticipating change.  
Whenever a crisis arises, the character of the operating environment will determine 
possible courses of action.  Developing and maintaining an understanding of the 
operating environment is a critical element in identifying future challenges.
The benefits of understanding
1.35. Commanders who understand the operating environment are better able to:
• develop an appreciation of the actors within an environment; 
• help develop alliances or agreements;
23 This model is widely used by both the NATO and the United States.
24 AAP-06, NATO Glossary of Terms and Definitions, 2015.
Section 3 – Understanding the operating  
environment
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
19
1
• develop empathy with another individual, group or community;
• write policy, strategy and plans;
• make better-informed decisions; and
• achieve influence.
1.36.  As understanding is contextual, it is perishable and requires continual 
development to maintain its validity.  Understanding can arise from internal and 
external sources.  
a. Internal sources include our own formal education, historical precedent 
and practical experience.
b.  External sources can be sub-divided into two broad categories – regulated 
and unregulated.  
(1)  Regulated sources include intelligence agencies and other agencies 
that control both their own sources and the intelligence they share.  
(2) Unregulated sources include, amongst other things, the media and 
the Internet.  
Commanders should be aware of favouring regulated sources over unregulated 
sources, as the validity of the data may be sound, or flawed, from either.
25  The Report of the Iraq Inquiry , Executive Summary, HMSO, 2016.
Section 3 – Understanding the operating  
environment
Failing to understand – planning the 2003 invasion of Iraq
The Report of the Iraq Inquiry (the ‘Chilcot Report’) concluded that planning the invasion 
of Iraq lacked the following vital fundamental elements:
• 'the best possible appreciation of the theatre of operations, including the political, 
cultural and ethnic background, and the state of society, the economy and 
infrastructure;
• a hard-headed assessment of risks;
• objectives which are realistic… and if necessary limited – rather than idealistic and 
based on optimistic assumptions; and
• allocation of the resources necessary for the task – both military and civil.' 25
Understanding

20
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
Joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment
1. 37. The joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment (JIPOE)26 
helps commanders develop their understanding of the operating environment and 
is a basis for planning.  Drawing on the joint intelligence estimate, it focuses the 
intelligence effort and prioritises intelligence requirements.  The JIPOE is a living 
product and as well as contributing to the early stages of the operational estimate, it 
assists in conducting the operation.
The operating environment  
1.38. We are likely to face a congested, cluttered, contested, connected and 
constrained operating environment.27  The operating environment impacts the 
decisions we make regarding the types of capabilities we need to both develop 
and maintain understanding.  The speed and quality of data flow may provide 
commanders with significant amounts of information.  This places additional 
requirements on commanders and their staff who should consider the following 
factors.
a. Information and communications technology.  Information and 
communications technology will continue to affect the way that we share and 
fuse information.  The increasing volume of information available will have 
to be prioritised and analysed.  Creating networks to help share this burden 
and enable understanding is a complex process.  To help enable the process, 
commanders should seek to use common operating methods to enable 
information sharing wherever possible.
b. Information quality control.  Commanders should ensure that processes 
are in place to control the quality of information.  Unregulated external 
information may inhibit our understanding.  Our adversaries will exploit 
all information, including any that we release.  This emphasises the need 
for quality control, placing demands on our ability to collate, analyse and 
understand information.  
c. Automation of the analysis process.  Technological advances will further 
automate the analysis process.  While automated analysis offers significant 
increases in the speed of processing, it can also incur risk.  Technology can fail, 
and analytical processes that rely solely on logic lack judgement, intuition and 
human empathy. 
26 AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Counter Intelligence and Security .
27 DCDC, Future Operating Environment 2035, 2015.
We are likely to 
face a congested, 
cluttered, 
contested, 
connected and 
constrained 
operating 
environment.
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
21
1
Human factors that affect the operating environment
1.39.  The human factors that affect the operating environment can be broken into 
four areas for analysis, the: 
• culture  that affects how people 
interpret and orient themselves 
towards that environment; 
• institutions  that embody  
cultural ideas as practices; 
• technology and infrastructure  
that people assemble to survive 
in their environment; and 
• physical location  in which 
people live.  
1.40. The four areas described above overlap significantly.  Considering the role 
of people as actors in isolation on the global stage – as states, non-state actors, 
populations, organisations, groups and individuals – provides insufficient depth to 
develop understanding.  Commanders must analyse each area both in isolation and 
how they interact locally, regionally and internationally.  Beyond that, commanders 
must consider where they can create effects and lever influence within the operating 
environment.  Some facets may be so culturally distant from us that there is little 
common ground; others are universal, for example, the need for security and food.  
1.41.  Culture includes the general and pervasive ideas of a society: language; 
historically-rooted concepts of collective identity; and fundamental existential and 
moral beliefs such as those provided by religion.  Culture may be sub-divided into 
two categories.
a. Ideology.   Ideology concerns common ideas, language, rituals and theories 
providing a common bond for communities such as tribes, religious groups 
and ethnic groups.
b.  Psychology.   Psychology concerns the mental and emotional state, and 
behaviour, of individuals or groups and their interrelation.  It concerns what 
motivates them, their fears, attitudes and perceptions, and how these factors 
affect the courses of action available to them.  It relates to the notion of 
We need to understand the human factors
Understanding

22
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
competing narratives of individuals and groups with different interests and 
needs, which sometimes join in a common cause.
1.42. Institutions embody ideas such as practices and conventions that form the 
landscape of social life.  This includes political institutions, law and judicial machinery, 
and bonded communities such as families, clans and tribes.  It also includes criminal 
associations and dissident groups operating outside of institutional conventions.  
Institutions can be broken into four categories.
a. Political.  The political system within which a population operates and may 
include global, regional, national and provincial systems. 
b. Military.  The system and allegiances within which military personnel 
operate, their reputation at home and abroad, their relationship to the political 
environment and the capabilities, structures and equipment they can bring to 
bear in support of the state.
c. Economic.  The economic bodies and organisations that influence 
the material prosperity of an area.  This also covers the ability to produce 
and distribute goods, their consumption, and providing financial services.  
Economic considerations can be local, national or international and are linked 
to the political environment.
d. Legal.  These are the institutions that oversee the international and 
national laws applicable to a state, community or organisation.  This includes 
institutions such as the courts and judiciary.
1.43. Analysing the technology and infrastructure essential for day-to-day life will 
help us to understand how communities shape the environment to suit their needs.  
This includes physical artefacts such as communications systems and infrastructure, 
roads, irrigation and buildings.  Analysing technology should consider the level 
of technical and scientific development and supporting infrastructure within the 
environment, including: 
• transport;
• manufacturing;
• energy generation;
• financial technology;
• information and communications technology;
• cyber capability;
• media; and
• military technology including sensors, weapons and intelligence gathering.
Institutions 
embody ideas 
such as 
practices and 
conventions 
that form the 
landscape of 
social life. 
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
23
1
1.44. Analysing where people are located will contribute to a commander’s 
understanding of the situation.  Factors should include terrain, climate and access to 
resources. 
Analysing actors
1.45. Analysing actors must go beyond the traditional characterisation of friendly 
forces, enemy forces and civilians.  Some actors may change position, perhaps 
frequently, and may appear friendly and adversarial at the same time depending 
on their motivations.  Motivation is based on a combination of self-interest, values, 
ideology, survival and fear.  Those same factors affect our own position in relation to 
different actors.  
1.46. Actors can be categorised in four ways – state actors, non-state actors, global 
actors and local actors.
a. State actors are individuals or group actors aligned with or representing 
their state.  State actors include: 
 Ĕ governments and government agencies (political, military and 
economic); 
 Ĕ state-controlled industries (such as defence industries or utilities 
providers in some states); and 
 Ĕ state representatives in global organisations or alliances.
b.  Non-state actors are individuals and groups that are independent of a 
state.  Non-state actors include: 
 Ĕ state aspirants (for example, Palestinians and Kurds);
 Ĕ independent groups (such as non-governmental organisations); and 
 Ĕ individuals (such as lobbyists, philanthropists, criminals, refugees and 
displaced persons). 
c. Global actors operate and have influence at the global level.  These 
include: 
 Ĕ groups of states working together through a formal and legal body 
(such as the United Nations, North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations or the African Union); 
 Ĕ transnational companies and multinational corporations; 
 Ĕ global organisations (for example, the nuclear protest movement); and 
 Ĕ individual actors who transcend their own state affiliations. 
Analysing 
actors must 
go beyond the 
traditional 
characterisation 
of friendly 
forces, enemy 
forces and 
civilians. 
”
“
Understanding

24
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
d. Local actors possess the ability to hold a common or collective perspective 
at the lowest level within or without the formal state structure.  Local actors 
include communities based on regional, provincial, town, village, family, ethnic 
or tribal lineage.  They also include communities based on criminal activity and 
those supporting warlords.
Membership of multiple groups
1.47. We are all members of multiple groups, whether we are born into them (for 
example, families or ethnic groups), assimilate into them (for example, as members 
of political parties, or jihad supporters) or achieve status (for example, with higher 
education or profession). 
1.48. Being part of a group usually means acting according to the rules or norms of 
that group, whether these rules are explicit or implicit.  Each group we are a member 
of influences what we believe and how we behave.  Individuals behave depending on 
the context they find themselves in.  
1.49. Most people do not remain a member of the same groups throughout their 
life, instead they will join or leave groups either by choice or circumstance.  In most 
societies, people change group allegiance when they move jobs or home, marry, vote 
for different political parties or make new friends.  Even seemingly fixed groups (such 
Most people are members of multiple groups
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
25
1
as families or tribes) can change within a lifetime, through marriage or other formal 
arrangements with new groups.  It is therefore inaccurate (and potentially dangerous) 
to view personal group memberships as fixed.  
1.50.  Commanders must understand that individuals are not members of just one 
group.  Therefore, allegiance to rules and norms are seldom fixed and can change 
through context and circumstance.
Command climate
1.51.  Leaders at all levels should establish and maintain a climate that enables the 
continuous development of understanding.  They should create an atmosphere that 
encourages open-mindedness, critical analysis and creative thinking.  The command 
climate should enable staff to tell commanders what they need to know, even if it 
appears to contradict the commander’s views.  However, this is a two-way process 
and commanders should clearly articulate their requirements for understanding and 
trust their staff to deliver.
Perceptions
1.52.  Perception involves forming a view of something through intuition or 
interpretation of available knowledge.  Internal sources, education, our experiences 
and prior beliefs shape the way we individually perceive situations.  The fact that 
we are shaped by our perceptions reinforces the first principle of understanding: 
the need for self-awareness.  However, there are limitations to perceptions.  Our 
initial perception may be flawed or wrong because of biases in interpretation, 
inaccurate intelligence, false information or deception.  There is also a tendency to 
look at a problem from only one standpoint.  Commanders should recognise the 
impact that perceptions can have on the development of understanding and their 
decision-making process.  Similarly, other actors have their own perception of a 
situation on which they base their actions.  Commanders should strive to understand 
others’ perceptions and the narratives they develop from them, as well as their own.  
Commanders should consider:
• the scope of the problem;
Section 4 – Factors that affect the development  
of understanding
Understanding

26
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
• their own initial perceptions;
• what they believe or know to be the views of the other actors;
• how to identify those issues on which views are similar and those on which 
they diverge;
• how to identify, and close, the gaps in their understanding; and
• cultural awareness.  
Cultural awareness
1.53. Cultural awareness is critical to understanding, requiring us to develop cultural 
expertise in areas where we are likely to operate, together with a more general 
awareness of other cultures.  On multinational operations, commanders should also 
consider the wide cultural differences that may exist within an alliance.  Commanders 
should ask the following questions to understand the operating environment.
a. What defines the cultures (dominance, basic ideology, beliefs and 
practices)?
b. What are the ‘dos and don’ts’ (accepted behavioural norms)?
c. Who can tell us what we need to know (specific sources from that culture)?
d. How can we exploit greater knowledge of the culture to our advantage 
(application)?
1.54. Commanders may receive advice from specialists, both military and civilian.  
Advice may also be available from other sources with varying levels of cultural 
awareness. 
a. General awareness.  General awareness requires an active approach to 
learning more about different cultures.  Providing lectures on culture during 
initial pre-deployment training for personnel, before they enter an operational 
theatre, is one example of general cultural awareness familiarisation.  
b. Awareness competence.  Awareness competence is gained through 
proximity to a culture and may be achieved during an extended operational 
tour.  A daily requirement to interact with another culture either directly 
(where basic language skills have been achieved) or, more likely, through an 
interpreter, requires confidence, interest and a willingness to succeed.  This 
approach can deliver a degree of cultural competence which can develop over 
time into expertise.  Commanders and key staff should aspire to this level of 
personal cultural awareness competence. 
Commanders 
may receive 
advice from 
specialists, both 
military and 
civilian.  
”
“
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
27
1
c. Cultural expertise.   Cultural expertise requires immersion in another’s 
culture and generally develops in concert with the ability to speak the 
language and to understand their mindset.  Developing expertise is a  
long-term process, requiring opportunities for immersion and proximity to 
the culture, as well as continuity.  Selecting individuals for such opportunities 
should focus on their aptitude and availability to develop such expertise; the 
attributes may not necessarily be those required in other aspects of military 
life.  Commanders must recognise the value of cultural expertise; true cultural 
experts are invaluable.
1.55.  Developing understanding is supported by information management, 
education and training, and collaborative networks.
a. Information management  includes the physical aspects of managing 
information (personal and staff management procedures) and the technical 
aspects (procurement, operating systems, technical support and upgrades).  
Physical information management aims to present relevant information to 
commanders to enable effective decision-making and to protect commanders 
from the negative impact of information overload.  Several factors should be 
considered.
 Ĕ What information is essential that we protect?
 Ĕ What are the priorities for information and intelligence?
 Ĕ How much detail is required to allow a decision to be made?
 Ĕ Which key decision-makers who need the information?
 Ĕ What resources are available and for how long?
 Ĕ How best to balance the need to circulate information to enable 
understanding and the need to maintain security (including 
operations security) and to protect sources and methods?
Section 5 – Enabling understanding
Understanding

28
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
b. Education and training enable understanding.  Command and  
staff training must advance the skills that develop understanding; this  
should promote self-awareness, critical and creative thinking skills and  
open-mindedness.  For a specific operation, subject matter experts will 
undergo specialised training.   All other personnel should undertake  
pre-operational deployment training that includes a focus on cultural 
awareness and skills that enable military personnel to interact with the 
operating environment.  
c. Collaborative networks.  The single intelligence environment28 aims to 
establish a collaborative network that fuses all sources of intelligence to 
provide a common resource within the contemporary operating environment.
(1) A single intelligence environment will allow better adaptation to 
complex environments and the changing requirements for intelligence 
over time.  
(2) Establishing networks requires significant investment in education 
and training, and the technical solutions to make it viable.29
28 JDP 2-00, Understanding and Intelligence Support to Joint Operations  (3rd Edition) describes in more 
detail the single intelligence environment, for which the UK’s Defence Intelligence organisation is the lead 
agency.
29 F J Sulloway, Born to Rebel: Birth Order, Family Dynamics and Creative Lives , 1996.
‘What differentiates revolutionary thinkers from non-revolutionary ones is almost never 
a greater knowledge of the facts.  Darwin knew far less about the various species he 
collected on the Beagle voyage than did experts back in England who classified these 
organisms for him.  Yet expert after expert missed the revolutionary significance of what 
Darwin had collected.  Darwin, who knew less, somehow understood more.’
Born to Rebel: Birth Order, Family Dynamics and Creative Lives 
F J Sulloway29
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
29
1
 
Key points  
• Understanding helps us to identify the causes of conflict, the nature of emerging 
crises, and the context required for determining deterrence, coercion or response 
postures.
• Defence support to national understanding falls into five broad categories: 
 Ĕ horizon scanning;
 Ĕ situational awareness;
 Ĕ support to policy and planning formulation;
 Ĕ contingency planning; and
 Ĕ Defence Engagement.
• Understand ing involves acquiring and developing knowledge to a level that 
enables us to know why something has happened or is happening (insight) and be 
able to identify and anticipate what may happen (foresight).  
• The principles of understanding are:
 Ĕ self-awareness;
 Ĕ critical analysis;
 Ĕ creative thinking; and
 Ĕ continuity.
• Developing and maintaining an understanding of the operating environment is a 
critical element in identifying future challenges.
• T he human factors that affect the operating environment are: culture; institutions; 
technology and infrastructure; and physical location.
• Leaders at all levels should establish and maintain a climate that enables the 
continuous development of understanding. 
• Developing understanding is supported by information management, education 
and training, and collaborative networks.
Understanding

30
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1
Notes
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
31
1A
Annex 1A – A guide for 
developing understanding
1A.1.  In a crisis, our initial understanding could be limited.  We are likely to 
know the location of the problem, the general nature of the situation, the rough 
time frame during which it has been developing and have a broad idea of the 
information sources we will need to access.  We will develop and build on that initial 
understanding by defining more accurately the requirement for further knowledge, 
establishing networks and selecting the most effective analytical tool.  Analysis 
allows us to construct a more accurate perspective of the human factors that affect 
the operating environment and enhance our understanding of how the separate 
environments interact with one another.  This then allows us to identify what effects 
we can create, and who we can or cannot influence.
1A.2.  It is very difficult to test understanding.  Understanding cannot be observed, 
but can only be inferred by behaviours such as contextualising, comparing and 
contrasting, and analysing. 30 
1A.3.  The following list of activities provides a summary of how to develop 
understanding. 
a. Clearly articulate the requirements.
b.  Self-awareness: knowing ourselves as individuals and as organisations; 
and understanding our own strengths, weaknesses, prejudices and 
perceptions. 
c. Learn how our own cross-government approach and relationships 
work, how they may be improved, and how departments may gain a better 
appreciation of each other’s efforts.
30  Principles for Learning Meaningful Knowledge, available at http://www.indiana.edu/~idtheory/
methods/m6c.html
Colin Powell 
‘Experts often possess more data than judgement.’
Understanding

32
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
1A
d. Research our own culture, society and the wider population and their 
perceptions of us and what we do, and how this impacts on political and 
military decision-making.
e. Analyse our partners and allies; understand their interests, intent, values 
and best practice. 
f. Establish situational awareness by collating information and intelligence 
already available; this represents initial understanding.
g. Determine what type of understanding you require.  This might be to 
understand something for your own decision-making or to achieve collective 
or common understanding to try and influence others.
h. Develop strategic understanding, appropriate for national leaders, or 
tactical-level understanding.
i. Frame the context in which we may be intending to operate.
j. Connect the aims of the strategy, operation, mission and/or role and how it 
fits into the bigger picture.
k. Study the culture, traditions, population and society of the country/
countries in which we may operate, or from whom we may request support, or 
with whom we wish to remain neutral. 
l. Promote (through example) the value and importance of personal 
relationships with other actors throughout the operating environment.
m. Develop a vision, intent and narrative and share it with staff and partners 
within a command climate conducive to developing understanding.  
n. Encourage staff to challenge the accepted wisdom.
o. Build a network of information sources to answer your questions 
and provide specific knowledge; use all available resources, including 
headquarters staff, intelligence organisations and subject matter experts.  
p. Encourage working together and open-mindedness.
Understanding

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
33
1A
q. Analyse the human factors that affect the operating environment based 
on the cultural, institutional, technological and physical factors in relation to 
the actors.  
r.  Identify how to achieve influence (for example, using hard or soft power to 
affect the adversary’s decision-making).
s. Identify actors and their motivations, affiliations and needs.  From this 
analysis, determine where internal and external narratives may compete.
t. Learn from the consequences of decisions made and adapt when 
necessary.
u. Remain aware that understanding is perishable and must be constantly 
refreshed.
31  Biggs, J.B, Student Approaches to Learning and Studying .  Victoria: Australian Council for Educational 
Research, 1987.
How do you achieve understanding?
‘‘How’ you approach learning (strategy) depends on ‘why’ you want to learn it in the first 
place (motive). 31  If your desire to learn springs from the urge to gain a paper qualification 
with minimal trouble or effort, it is likely that you will focus on what appears to be the 
most important topics (as defined by examinations) and reproduce them.  Because of 
this focus, you will not see interconnections between elements or the meanings and 
implications of what is learned.  However, if your motive to learn is based on curiosity, you 
will adopt a strategy to seek meaning.  There is a personal commitment to learning, which 
means that you will relate the content to personally meaningful contexts or to existing 
prior knowledge, depending on the subject concerned.  You will search for analogies, 
relate to previous knowledge, theorise about what is learned, and derive extensions and 
exceptions.’
Professor Y K Ip,  
Associate Director,  
Centre for the Development of Teaching and Learning,  
National University of Singapore
Understanding

[Page 41: No extractable text]

35
Decision-making
Chapter 2 begins by introducing a theoretical concept for 
thinking.  It then develops ideas about the factors relating 
to problem solving and how and why we think the way 
we do.  The chapter then discusses building effective 
teams and concludes with advice for commanders.  It is 
supported by two annexes on organisational learning and 
adaptation, and biases and heuristics.
 
Chapter 2
2
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
Section 1 – A conceptual framework for thinking. . 37
Section 2 – Problem solving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
Section 3 – Thinking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Section 4 – Choosing the right team. . . . . . . . . . 51
Section 5 – Advice to commanders. . . . . . . . . . . 56
Annex 2A – Organisational learning and  
                        adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Annex 2B – Biases and heuristics: why we think  
                       the way we do . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65

36
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
Machines don’t fight wars.  People do, 
and they use their minds.
 
John R Boyd”
“
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
37
2
Chapter 2 – Decision-making
2.1.  Understanding informs decision-making and it follows that the better our 
understanding, the better-informed our decisions will be.  Decision-making is  
not a wholly rational activity and multiple influences will affect our judgement.  
Chapter 2 does not explain how to make decisions.  Rather, it outlines the key 
components of decision-making (information, problem solving, how people think, 
using and influencing thinking, team dynamics and learning) to offer guidance for 
commanders and staff.  This chapter reflects the principle of doctrine: it does not 
outline what to think, but rather how  to think.  Annex 2A discusses organisational 
learning and adaptation, and Annex 2B discusses biases and heuristics. 
2.2.  A conceptual framework for thinking can help to find and then apply the right 
thinking strategy to a particular situation.  Figure 2.1 depicts a framework with two 
thinking dimensions – ways and means.  No single way of thinking is better than the 
other.  Divergent ways of thinking that explore, develop options, generalise and use 
inductive reasoning can both complement and contrast with convergent ways that 
conclude, decide, deduce and deconstruct.  
2.3.  The means of thinking (the resources applied) contrasts conscious methods 
(applying logic, analysis, rules and procedures, and scientific method) with 
unconscious methods (intuition, creativity, insight, social understanding, instinct and 
heuristics). 
Figure 2.1 – A conceptual framework for thinking
Section 1 – A conceptual framework for thinking
Divergent ways
(Exploring and construction)
Creative innovation
Time available, problem 
unbounded and complex, 
addressed using a social 
collectiveUnconscious 
means
(Intuitive and 
creative)
Systematic exploration
Time available, 
information available, 
staﬀ-led team
Intuitive decision
Time critical, problem 
unbounded or complex, 
experience available
Logical decision
Time critical, 
criteria available, 
command-led
Convergent ways
(Concluding and deciding)
Conscious 
means
(Deliberate and 
rational)
”
Decision-making

38
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
Complexity
2.4. The broad spectrum of Defence utility means that we must be prepared 
to engage in a wide range of activities from war fighting to peacekeeping.  Such 
activities may have to be done concurrently, in different locations, within different 
contexts.  The operating environment is often referred to as complex, with much 
written to suggest it will only become more so.  Complex military operations 
(operations consisting of many different and connected parts) are not a new 
phenomenon.  Wrongly, complexity has come to be synonymous with difficult to 
understand.     
2.5. Commanders are increasingly required to work with civilian partners and 
this more inclusive approach is not just cross-governmental; it is a key element 
for all those with a stake in operations.  The typical breadth of inter-agency and 
multinational engagement increases the complexity of problem solving, but diverse 
perspectives across a complex network can also generate significant opportunities. 
We are likely to work with key civilian partners who are not part of the governmental system
‘Simplicity is a great virtue but it requires hard work to achieve it and education to 
appreciate it.  And to make matters worse: complexity sells better.’
Edsger W. Dijkstra
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
39
2
Information
2.6.  Military decision-makers should consider the following with respect to 
information.
a. Data proliferation.   Modern information and communications technology 
has increased the amount of readily available data.  The ability to supply, 
process and transmit this data raises expectations and demand for even more 
information.  Technology has enhanced the range, speed and bandwidth of 
information bearers, resulting in the ability to manipulate large amounts of 
information.  However, this does not necessarily enhance understanding or 
the ability to exploit the information for decision-making.  The volume of 
information, the requirement to integrate numerous sources and speed of 
reaction can result in information overload and decision paralysis.
b.  Technological dependency.   Technology continues to transform the 
information flow in the battlespace, providing commanders with new 
capabilities to lever operational advantage.  However, over-relying on specific 
technology, applications or bearers to deliver mission critical information, 
can lead to single points of failure.  Advances in technology may lead to an 
over-estimation of its ability to enhance sensing, thinking and understanding.  
Technology should be exploited to facilitate understanding, but a technological 
approach does not necessarily serve the more people-centric approach required 
for complex operations.
c. The media.  The reach of global media both facilitates and complicates 
our ability to influence and manage perceptions, both within and external to 
the operating environment.  Media reporting of apparently minor events can 
create significant interest, placing an additional burden on deployed personnel 
to understand the potential implications of their actions.  Commanders must 
contend with multiple audiences simultaneously – domestic, allied, in-theatre, 
regional and global – by tailoring their messages.  
Commanders are increasingly required to work with 
civilian partners and this more inclusive approach is not 
just cross-governmental; it is a key element for all 
those with a stake in operations .
”
“
Decision-making

40
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
Unbounded problems
2 .7. The solution to bounded problems may lie in a consistent approach based 
on precedent or process, but unbounded problems demand a more innovative 
response.  Approaching unbounded problems using individual or single institutional 
frameworks may prove unsuccessful if the nature of the problem demands creative 
or novel thinking.  To encourage collaboration and creativity, commanders facing 
unbounded problems must first consider asking questions rather than focusing on 
answers.  Outcomes of actions are particularly uncertain in complex environments 
and with wicked problems.32  It does not follow that a repeated action will generate 
the same outcome it did on the first occasion.
Time criticality and stress
2.8. Training, education and experience allow us to base our decision-making 
in time-critical situations largely on intuition, rather than on deliberate reasoning 
or analysis.  Forming patterns and mental templates from realistic training and 
operational experience allows us to associate current problems with past examples 
and to select appropriate options.  Adopting certain practices (procedures, using 
checklists and challenge teams) can help to overcome biases inherent in these 
intuitive approaches to problem solving.  The approaches relevant to tactical 
situations and the more deliberate analysis applicable to operational design and 
strategic thinking may differ. 
Heuristics and biases  
2.9. Heuristics are cognitive ‘rules of thumb’ that allow us to make quick mental 
calculations that are necessary for quick decisions and responses.  An awareness of 
cognitive biases and heuristics has been shown to help people avoid their effects, 
particularly for people of high intellectual capabilities.33  A summary of some key 
heuristics and biases is provided at Annex 2B.
32 Grint K, Wicked Problems and Clumsy Solutions: The Role of Leadership , Clinical Leader, Volume I (2), 
2008.  Note the use of term ‘wicked’ here has come to denote resistance to resolution, rather than evil.
33 Stanovich K E and West R F, On the Relative Independence of Thinking Biases and Cognitive Ability , 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Volume 94, Number 4, pages 672-695, 2008.
Section 2 – Problem solving
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
41
2
Thinking at the operational level
2.10.  Decisive, fast-acting leadership may be appropriate in the initial response to 
a crisis; initial judgements and first impressions apply to many aspects of problem 
solving.   Problems at the operational level of command tend to be less structured 
and may require divergent thinking to provide novel or creative solutions.  Mental 
and procedural templates for such problems may prove ineffective.  
Organisational thinking  
2 .11.  Successful organisations evolve to develop a range of resources to manage 
complexity.  They facilitate the development and sharing of specialist knowledge and 
skills to resolve complex challenges.  However, competition for resources between 
and within organisations and self-serving intra-organisational interests may impede 
rational thought.  Moreover, at the highest levels of an organisation, assumptions 
can be shared and consequently ‘mutually reinforced’.34  Commanders should guard 
against this tendency for decision-making by consensus.
Military culture
2.12.  It may not be helpful to consider ‘military culture’ as a single entity.  All 
three of our single Services have distinct cultures that shape their attitudes and 
behaviour.  Each has a strong culture that conditions how they perceive the external 
environment, the challenges that they face and their potential responses.  This affects 
the way we interact with each other, with external agencies, and the way we operate.  
Military culture can have a positive impact: loyalty, trust, cohesion and shared values 
have a positive impact on our ability to make decisions and enact them.
2.13.  Commanders must account for the resulting biases when operating in a joint 
environment and recognise that perceptions and bias can be even more prevalent 
and entrenched when working with allies or occasional partners.  Open-mindedness 
and a willingness to challenge our own perceptions and ideas are vital in the 
multinational and inter-agency environments.  Patience and listening skills are key, as 
is the ability to grasp different perspectives.  Commanders should plan to operate at a 
tempo that allows time to develop such perspectives.
34  Schein, E. H. Organizational Culture and Leadership , 2004.
Successful 
organisations 
evolve to 
develop 
a range  of 
resources 
to manage 
complexity.
”
“
Decision-making

42
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
2.14. Thinking is a mental activity that allows us to understand, plan, reason, 
solve problems, innovate and make decisions.  However, the thinking required in 
all these tasks is not the same type.  Long-term planning does not use the same 
mental resources as short-term planning and a person’s thinking will not be equally 
effective in all tasks.  Commanders may encounter circumstances in which their own 
and their staff’s thinking could be, for example, more imaginative or less vulnerable 
to mistakes.  Unless we have some awareness of how we think, we cannot begin to 
mitigate potentially adverse effects. 
2.15. Understanding how thinking fails allows us to develop ways of avoiding such 
failures.  Comprehending how thinking works allows us to create the best conditions 
for thinking through training and education, selection and the equipment design, 
processes, organisations, doctrine and information.  In sum, training, mental discipline 
and rigour are key components for good analytical thinking, while intuitive thinking 
relies on the right conditions, knowledge, an uncluttered mind, positive emotions and 
confidence.
Cognition
2.16. Cognition is a term used by psychologists to describe the acquisition, storage, 
retrieval and use of information or knowledge.  This takes place within a brain that 
has evolved specialised structures and functions that predetermine the ways in which 
cognition can work.  We begin life with memory, attention, perception and some 
cognitive processes already working in specified ways.  Cognition develops further 
through life and our environment has a significant influence; those with common 
experiences and those sharing a culture will develop some similarities in the way 
that they think.  The converse is also true; different experiences can cause people to 
perceive and understand the same situations very differently.  In multinational and 
multi-agency operations such differences may not be recognised until something 
goes wrong.  Liaison officers can play an important role in ensuring that mismatches 
in assumptions, values, language or expectations are discovered and bridged.  
Cultural differences in cognition are also important when assessing potential enemy 
courses of action.  Commanders must understand that an adversary’s thinking can be 
very different to their own while being wholly rational to the adversary.
Section 3 – Thinking
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
43
2
Individuals
2 .17.  Within cultural groups, there will be significant differences in some aspects of 
thinking.  Factors that can account for this include: 
• intelligence; 
• personality; 
• experience; 
• learning; 
• motivation; 
• status and role; and 
• physical condition.  
Furthermore, the emotional state of individuals, influenced by many of these 
individual factors, has a fundamental role in thinking. 35
Groups and organisations  
2.18.  Group and organisational ideas, understanding, perceptions and attitudes 
are developed through accumulated thinking by individuals interacting with each 
other.  The products of thinking are captured in external constructs such as concepts, 
languages and processes that are shared and used collectively.  
2.19.  Working together, collaboratively or in teams, is a central tenet of the approach 
to solving complex problems.  While cognitive factors influence teams, there are 
a number of factors that can affect how teams develop perceptions, construct 
meaning, judge, decide and act.  These factors include the following. 
a. Peer pressure.   Peer pressure is the influence exerted on an individual 
within a peer group to change their opinions, values or behaviours to conform 
to group norms.  This influence can be positive, particularly in terms of team 
building, and has a fundamental role in building and maintaining team 
discipline.  However, the pressure to conform can inhibit a team’s ability to 
challenge its collective understanding and its ability to think creatively or to 
innovate.
b.  Groupthink.   Groupthink is the tendency to adopt majority decisions, 
particularly by group members who are similar in background and values 
and where they perceive a need to present a consensus view (or simply wish 
to keep their leader happy).36  Although the focus of such cohesive groups is 
35  Damasio A, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness , 1999.
36  Irving J, Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and Fiascos , 1982.
Section 3 – Thinking
Working 
together, 
collaboratively 
or in teams, 
is a central 
tenet of the 
approach to 
solving complex 
problems. 
”
“
Decision-making

44
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
on the external problem, internal group dynamics may draw out conformity 
of opinion that is difficult for any individual to overcome, even when they 
know that the opinion of the group may be wrong.  This can lead to the group 
shortcutting the rational decision-making process so that the majority view 
is not challenged.37  In extreme cases, a group may begin to feel invulnerable 
and may be prone to take excessive risk; it may discount warnings, apply 
pressure to those who oppose the prevailing mood and create an illusion of 
unanimity.38  Overcoming groupthink requires acceptance of authentic dissent; 
commanders should be aware of this and both encourage and acknowledge 
dissenting views.
c. Social prejudice.  Social prejudice is a belief that another social group is 
less capable than one’s own.  Operating within groups can amplify such beliefs 
and their unconscious acceptance within a group.  The nature of modern 
operations, set against a diverse cultural and social backdrop, places a priority 
on the ability to overcome or set aside such prejudices, whether between 
individual Services, departments or nations.
37 McConville T, The War on Terrorism: A New Classic in Groupthink , 2003.
38 Brooks I, Organisational Behaviour – Individuals, Groups and Organisation , 2003.
The attack on Pearl Harbor – December 1941
Senior officers at Pearl Harbor did not take warnings from Washington DC about a 
potential invasion seriously, despite the fact that Japanese messages had been intercepted.  
They collectively believed that the Japanese would not dare to attempt an assault against 
the United States because they would recognise the futility of war with the United States. 
© IWM (MH 6014)
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
45
2
Polish pilots in the Second World War
During the Second World War, having fought two courageous, but ultimately losing battles 
in Poland and France, many Polish airmen and airwomen arrived in Britain determined to 
seek revenge.  They immediately sought to join the Royal Air Force (RAF).  While the Poles 
were keen to fight, the RAF would not let them fly operationally: few of the exiles spoke 
English and there was concern about their morale.  The RAF had failed to understand 
that many of the Poles were excellent pilots.  Having come through the Polish and French 
Campaigns, they had more combat experience than most of their British comrades and 
they employed superior tactics.  
As the Battle of Britain wore on, 
and the shortage of trained pilots 
became critical, the exiles were 
accepted into RAF squadrons and 
two Polish fighter units, Nos. 302 
and 303 Squadrons, were formed.  
Once committed to action, the Poles 
flew and fought superbly, shooting 
down 203 enemy aircraft for the 
loss of 29 pilots killed.  No. 303 
Squadron was the most successful 
Fighter Command unit in the Battle 
of Britain.
d. Education and culture.   Education and culture can influence the way 
in which we, as individuals, approach problem solving; the same influence 
applies to groupthink and analysis.  In particular, groups that receive better 
levels of education unconsciously adopt analytical methodologies and 
thinking strategies consistent with that education and culture.  
Dealing with complexity
2.20.  The operating environment may produce large amounts of data that 
constantly changes and not all of which is relevant.  Since processing this data would 
require a much larger brain than we possess, we have evolved mechanisms to deal 
efficiently with the data most relevant to our needs.  Comprehending how the brain 
works helps us to overcome some of the inherent weaknesses.  Annex 2A outlines a 
range of mechanisms that help us to frame why we think the way we do.© IWM (MH 1533)
Decision-making

46
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
Dealing with social situations
We have evolved to think about and understand factors that influence social interaction, 
making sense of other people’s behaviour by interpreting intent, motivation and attitude.  
However, a social factor such as behaviour is not fixed and so to understand social 
situations, we frame them within the context.  
a. Over time, people have developed cultural tools such as traditions, languages and 
beliefs, as well as legal, political and educational systems to function effectively in 
cooperative social groups.  These cultural tools can be very powerful, influencing core 
values that are very slow and difficult, if not impossible, to change.  They have to work 
in accordance with an inherently social brain, which is dominated by emotion.
b. Emotion drives important social behaviours such as communication, kinship, 
dominance and submission, and the control of behaviour through reward and 
punishment.  Our emotional experiences arise from two main areas of our brain: a 
primitive area that drives the powerful inherited emotions that we have in common 
with all people; and an area which drives our ability to learn emotional reactions and 
to control our more basic instincts.  The balance of control between these two areas 
varies between individuals and will determine the extent to which they can override 
emotionally-driven behaviour.  However, whether we realise it or not, emotions colour 
most aspects of our thinking.39  They can enhance or degrade how effectively we 
observe, learn, remember, reason, judge and make decisions.40  Some emotions, for 
example, fear of failure, may degrade mental performance: others, such as feeling 
valued, may provide the motivation and energy to perform well.  Strong emotions 
leave us more vulnerable to our inherent biases and encourage tunnel vision, where 
we can focus too much on our principal task at the cost of other factors.41
Our subconscious perception of other peoples’ emotions will influence how we respond 
to them and will become part of the subconscious processes that make sense of the world 
for us.42,43  Commanders can make effective use of this, not only for leading and managing 
their own organisations, but also for understanding complex social situations in an 
operational context.  
39 Schwarz N, Situated Cognition and the Wisdom of Feelings: Cognitive Tuning , in Feldman L, Barrett and 
Salovey (Editors), The Wisdom in Feeling , pages 144-166, 2002.
40 Dror I E, Peron A E, Hind S-L and Charlton D, When Emotions Get the Better of Us: The Effect of Contextual 
Top-down Processing on Matching Fingerprints , Applied Cognitive Psychology, 19, pages 799-809, 2005.
41 Dolan R J, Emotion, Cognition, and Behaviour,  Science, Volume 298, number 5596, pages 1191-1194, 
2002.
42 McClelland D C, Testing for Competence Rather than Intelligence , American Psychologist, 28, pages 1-14, 
1973.
43 Goleman D, Emotional Intelligence , 1995.
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
47
2
The leadership skills required for volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous military 
situations such as inference, improvisation, divergent thinking, creativity and intuition 
are all thinking skills derived from the subconscious ability to find meaningful patterns in 
complex, ambiguous and emotionally-charged situations.44
When we learn, we are creating new patterns of connections in our brains.  The more 
connections we make with new patterns, the better we have learned; we are able to 
remember and apply new knowledge in more situations.  We generate more connections 
through using the new knowledge and also by optimising our ability to make new 
connections.  If we are over-anxious or under-stimulated we do not learn well. 
 
Modes of thinking
2.21.  Psychological research generally focuses on two main types of thinking – 
intuitive and analytical – to compare how effective they are in different situations. 45  
Intuitive thinking has been compared with analytical thinking, particularly against 
reasoning, judgement and decision-making.  Complex problems may involve a 
combination of both thinking modes and it helps to understand which thinking 
mode is best suited, both at which time and for which part of the problem.  Table 2.1 
summarises a comparison between analytical and intuitive thinking.
44 Paparone C R, Anderson R and McDaniel R, Where Military Professionalism Meets Complexity Science , 
Armed Forces and Society, 34, pages 433-449, 2008.
45  For example, see Pretz J E Intuition Versus Analysis: Strategy and Experience in Complex Everyday Problem 
Solving, Memory and Cognition, 36 (3) 554-566, 2008.
Intuitive Analytical
Can be very effective under time pressure 
and reacting to sudden, unexpected events
Superior when accuracy and evidence are needed, 
and time and information are available
Expertise is often based on intuitive thinking 
developed through experience, and can be 
very accurate
Novices will rely on analytical thinking until they 
become more expert
More vulnerable to heuristics and biases Skilled analytical thinking is less influenced by 
emotion and heuristics
May use valuable situational information that 
is perceived unconsciously Can encourage ‘stove-piped’ thinking
Has been shown to be superior to analytical 
thinking for some types of complex or 
unstructured problems
Many tools and techniques have been developed in 
the tradition of objectivity and determinism and only 
use conscious means
General (non-expert) intuition can be more 
effective than analysis for novel, undefined 
problems
Training in logic can enhance analytical reasoning
Large capacity and concurrent Limited capacity and therefore consecutive
Table 2.1 – Comparison of thinking styles
Decision-making

48
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
Cognitive styles and preferences  
2.22. We have different abilities and preferences that affect when and how well 
we use different types of thinking.  Education, training, experience and changing 
circumstances influence abilities and preferences.  Evidence suggests that people use 
both types of thinking and can vary the predominance of either according to situation 
or preference.  With self-awareness, gained through education and feedback, people 
can adapt their thinking strategies.  
Situational factors  
2.23. Logical, analytical approaches to clearly defined problems work well.  People 
(and technologies) can apply systematic reasoning according to rules very effectively.  
Analytical approaches may not work well in situations that are poorly understood, 
where there is ambiguity and uncertainty and with no common agreement about 
the nature of the problem or the desired outcome.  Such approaches can give a false 
sense of progress while the reassuring process of analysis is underway, and can lead to 
narrow perceptions and result in lost opportunities.  The skill is to identify what levels 
of analytical and intuitive thinking should be used for what sort of situations.  It is 
unlikely to be a question of ‘all analysis’ or ‘all intuition’ for either completely defined 
problems or completely undefined problems.  Most problems demand a blend of 
analytical and intuitive thought.
Framing 
2.24. Framing is a personality-dependent blend of conscious and subconscious 
thought.  How information is framed can result in individuals drawing different 
conclusions.  Information presented in vivid detail will often lead people to disregard 
abstract or statistical information that may have greater evidential value.  Things 
that we see or hear directly are likely to have greater impact than second-hand 
information, even though the latter may have greater value.  Similarly, case histories 
and anecdotes tend to have greater impact than more informative but abstract 
aggregate or statistical data.  We also seldom reflect on an absence of information.  
The framing effect has implications for how commanders task their staff to present 
information and the weight they attribute to it.
We have 
different 
abilities and 
preferences 
that affect 
when and how 
well we use 
different types 
of thinking. 
”
“
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
49
2
Framing the decision
‘The frame is used to guide the decision maker's cognitive interpretation of the situation. 46  
At times, the frame may be incorrect, but until feedback or some other stimulus reveals 
the error, the frame remains the foundation for understanding the situation and for 
deciding potential courses of action.  If it is possible to identify the frame that the decision 
maker is using – and personality type may offer some clues – then it may be possible to 
predict the decision outcome.47  Such information may be particularly useful for those 
who must interact with decision makers, such as planning staff employed in operational 
headquarters; in such circumstances decision-making can become a social behaviour.  
Framing provides the context within which new information is used, and different frames 
concentrate on different kinds of information.  Individuals tend to avoid taking risks when 
outcomes are framed as gains and they tend to take risks when outcomes are framed as 
losses.48  Inflexible people tend to be overconfident in their frame's ‘correctness’, which 
makes them vulnerable to mistakes.  At the other extreme are those who are erratic and 
inconsistent, they see every side of every issue; ‘seeing it first this way and then that, 
they never resolve much of anything.’49  Beach et al  suggest that experts often exhibit 
the desirable flexibility without being inconsistent; experts perform better in fields 
involving physical processes and less well in those involving human behaviour.  If military 
commanders are experts in their field, swift and accurate risk decisions will be made when 
the environment is predictable.  Lacking this depth of experience, less senior officers must 
rely on the visible characteristics of the situation to guide their decision-making, with the 
result that they are more likely to behave rationally and do things ‘by the book’.50’ 
The Influence of Personality on Decision-Making51 
Squadron Leader T Keeling
Leadership
2.25.  Those dealing with complex and uncertain situations require a range of 
thinking skills and the ability to get the best thinking from their organisation.  Studies 
have described leadership in these situations as enabling an organisation to think 
for itself, to develop ideas and coordinate in a bottom-up manner.  In such cases, 
46  Beach and Connolly, The Psychology of Decision Making,  page 21.
47  Ibid., pages 32-33.
48  Ibid., pages 18-19.
49  Ibid., pages 19-21.
50  Ibid.
51  Squadron Leader T Keeling, The Influence of Personality on Decision-Making , Joint Service Command 
and Staff College, 2009.
Decision-making

50
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
the means for executing leadership is through social mechanisms that encourage 
communication and dialogue, develop trust, and stimulate interest and creativity.
Cognitive resilience  
2.26. Individuals are cognitively resilient if they are able to recognise, adapt to and 
absorb variants, changes, disturbances and surprises.52  This is essential for operating 
effectively in a complex environment but can be degraded by physiological stressors 
including physical exertion, dehydration, hypothermia, sleep loss and poor diet.53
2 . 27. Cognitive (or brain) fitness is described as ‘a state of optimised ability to reason, 
remember, learn, plan and adapt that is enhanced by certain attitudes, lifestyle 
choices and exercises’.54  Cognitive fitness is comparable with physical fitness since 
cognitive fitness is increased by mental stimulation, physical exercise, good nutrition, 
stress management and sleep.  Equally, it is eroded by chronic stress, fatigue, 
distraction, anxiety, depression and ageing.
Over-dependency on technology and processes  
2.28. Some tools such as planning templates, mind maps, whiteboards and other 
visual displays can help to overcome the limitations of short-term memory.  For 
example, doctrine contains templates, derived from best practice, to help execute 
complex tasks such as the operational estimate and recommends battle rhythms with 
their associated meetings.  However, these templates are only ever guides and they 
require judgement in application.  It is essential to dispel any belief that completing 
the template means that a satisfactory result has been reached.  
2.29. Common processes are vital to help disparate organisations work together 
effectively, particularly when under pressure.  We should not, however, become slaves 
to technology or process at the expense of adapting to, and innovating in, a new 
operating context.  The key is to be flexible enough with any template and to take 
other partners with you when adaptation is required.
Reasoning by analogy 
2.30. People will often look to their own experiences or other similar situations to 
make comparisons and diagnose courses of action that have worked previously.  This 
approach relies upon how accurate the comparison is with the previous situation 
(and context).  Situations may be superficially similar but have radically different 
52 Woods D D and Hollnagel E Prologue, Resilience Engineering: Concepts and Precepts , Ashgate: 
Aldershot, 2006.
53 Wesensten et al, Cognitive Readiness in Network Operations , Parameters, Spring, 2005.
54 Gilkey R and Kilts C, Cognitive Fitness , Harvard Business Review, November, pages 1-10, 2007.
Common 
processes are 
vital to help 
disparate 
organisations 
work together 
effectively, 
particularly 
when under 
pressure.  
”
“
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
51
2
underlying properties.  When situations are inherently uncertain and ambiguous, 
there is a higher risk of using inappropriate analogies. 55  Training and education, 
which includes a wide range of real-world scenarios, can help people to become more 
effective in using analogy as a tool for understanding.  
Multiple perspectives 
2.31.  Expertise is not always the most effective resource.  Experts can develop highly 
efficient ways of thinking, but may inadvertently become less flexible and unable to 
recognise new perspectives.  Sometimes a naive viewpoint will provide a valuable 
new approach to a situation.56   
Organisational constraints  
2.32.  The opportunity for, and ability of, individuals to think will depend on 
external factors, such as individual development, organisational structure and 
processes, culture, leadership and rewards.  The collective ability of individuals within 
organisations (and organisational ability to capture the product of thinking) will shape 
an organisation’s capability to generate effective thinking.
2.33.  When making decisions, commanders will have to rely on information, ideas 
and suggestions from their team.  Good teams provide balanced, critical advice, 
and provide the staff functions that enable the commander time to think.  There are 
different ways for commanders to structure teams to mitigate the individual, group 
and organisational limitations for problem solving.  Some of these approaches are 
explored in this section.
a. A multi-discipline approach.   Increasing specialisation is a natural response 
to the opportunities created by modern technology, but places high demands 
on technical knowledge.  This requires a multi-discipline approach to problem 
solving, including approaches such as joint organisations, albeit with the 
55  Gavetti G and Rivkin J W, How Strategists Really Think: Tapping the Power of Analogy , Harvard Business 
Review, April, pages 1-11, 2005.
56  Frensch P A and Sternberg R J, Expertise and Intelligent Thinking: When is it Worse to Know Better? , in 
Advances in the Psychology of Human Intelligence, Volume 5, 1989.
Section 4 – Choosing the right team
Decision-making

52
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
purpose of integrating specialist knowledge and capabilities without diluting 
them.57 
b. Task-orientated teams.  Rigid organisational structures may not adjust 
effectively to new tasks and can stifle effective inter-agency collaboration.  
Commanders should consider forming task-orientated teams and, if necessary, 
realign existing structures.  
c. Red teams.  One way to counter the effects of cognitive bias is to form a 
group whose aim is to challenge the commander’s plan.  Red teams may have 
a broader role to seek out dissenting and novel ideas and to present alternative 
and critical perspectives on all aspects of the problem.  A red team can monitor 
groupthink bias and ensure that sufficient analysis and debate has been 
completed before a policy, plan or strategy is decided.  
d. Knowledge networks.  Knowledge networks that extend beyond  
the organisation can allow commanders to gain access to new ideas and  
multi-disciplinary expertise.  Knowledge networks are also a useful means to 
test the reliability of existing information and ideas.  Deployed commanders 
have traditionally used reachback to draw on mainly UK-based expertise; 
however, (within the bounds of operational security) they should also consider 
wider sources. 
Supporting red teams 
2.34. It can be difficult for a red team to gain traction within an existing 
organisation; such teams, which often approach problems from a novel perspective, 
can cause anxiety amongst mainstream elements.  For red teams to work effectively, 
commanders must ensure that they have: 
• the authority, patronage and support of the commander and chief of staff; 
• good lines of communication with the rest of the command; and
• sufficient independence to think critically. 
Since red teams are not staff branches, their products need to be injected at some 
point into the mainstream processes of the organisation.  
57 Multi-disciplinary teams have proven highly effective in areas such as air-land integration, but are 
equally applicable to humanitarian relief, peace support, stabilisation, counter-insurgency and even 
strategic planning in the Ministry of Defence, which all demand comprehensive approaches to integrate 
the available expertise and capabilities. 
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
53
2
Regional Command (South) Prism Cell
On taking command of Regional Command (South) in Afghanistan in November 2009, 
Major General Nick Carter established a Prism Cell within his headquarters.  It functioned 
as a red team, but was also directed to focus on issues that were receiving insufficient 
attention in the headquarters, such as political engagement, reintegration and mobilising 
the religious establishment.  In this latter role, the Prism Cell pushed the boundaries of 
conventional J5 planning and was proactive in anticipating issues and scoping solutions.
Among other tasks, the Prism Cell was directed to look into the reintegration of insurgents.  
Previous reintegration programmes had been generally ill-conceived, poorly executed 
and contaminated by corruption and, as a result, the Afghan people and international 
community were cynical about new schemes.  The task given to the Prism Cell was to 
draw together a common approach to 
overcome resistance and cynicism  
– joining up with Headquarters 
International Security Assistance 
Force’s (ISAF’s) Reintegration Cell and 
the Reintegration Team at ISAF Joint 
Command.  The Prism Cell successfully 
produced a policy and guidance for 
reintegration and designed the  
cross-functional team to make the 
Coalition's approach in the South 
operational.
Building trust in teams
“Successful coalitions are based upon building and having trust.  It needs 
leaders who can rise above the obvious exasperations that are natural and to 
be expected.”
General Mattis,  
US Marine Corps
2.35.  Establishing trust within, and between, groups from different organisations 
or cultural backgrounds is an essential prerequisite to effective partnering.  Such 
teams require incentives for developing trust, including shared goals and objectives.  
However, trust takes time to develop.58  During crises, teams often develop on an  
58 Christopher et al, 'A taxonomy for selecting global supply chain strategies', International Journal of 
Logistics Management , 2006.  
Decision-making

54
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
ad hoc basis and without a long-term perspective.  We characterise such groups as 
either crisis driven, task-orientated, self-evolving, time-sensitive or temporary.  
2.36. Commanders need to understand the level of trust that exists within their 
teams.  Table 2.2 lists the attributes of high-trust and low-trust teams,59 highlighting 
the advantages of high-trust teams and providing a checklist for commanders to alert 
them to low-trust team behaviour. 
Table 2.2 – Trust in teams
Building trust quickly  
2 . 37. The term ‘swift trust’ encompasses the vulnerability, uncertainty, risk and 
expectations that surface within hastily-formed networks. 60  Although behaviour 
within such personal networks presupposes trust, traditional forms of trust such 
59 Colonel Mclay E, Strengthening RC(S) – Unity of Effort , CJTF-6/DCOS/001, 19 July 2009.
60 Meyerson D, Weik K E, Kramer R M, Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research , Sage 
Publications, pages 166-195, 1996.
High-trust teams Low-trust teams
Shared goals
Awareness of shared goals
Time given to build shared goals
Early and open debate of goals
Primacy of team-based goals
Lack of awareness of shared goals
Lack of shared goals
Opinions of others not considered
Primacy of individual goals
Power
Availability of facilitators
Facilitators' focus on win-win
Recognition of knowledge as 
power
Recognition that power can 
shift between team members 
and across the distributed 
environment
Power differentials minimised
Power battles
Coercion
Misunderstandings and conflicts 
of interest 
Use of hierarchical power 
 
 
Perception of 'I have power'
Communication Face-to-face where possible Over-reliance on electronic means
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
55
2
as familiarity, shared experience and reciprocal disclosure are not obvious. 61  A 
framework based on the following conditions will serve to build trust more quickly.
a. Reputation.   Trust may be based on the reputation of the organisation, 
rather than the capabilities of an individual.  Reputation is context-dependent, 
so leaders should understand the concerns and aims of prospective partner 
organisations.  
b.  Dispositional trust.   This refers to the general disposition of an individual to 
trust other people; some people are more trusting than others.  
c. Rules or protocols.  The presence of rules or protocols, and the adherence 
to them, is a safeguard against behaviour which may destabilise an 
organisation and reduce inter-personal and inter-organisational trust.  
d. Organisational factors.   Differences in organisational goals, negative 
organisational stereotypes and ideological differences serve to complicate 
working relationships between the military and other organisations.  Military 
organisations are typically hierarchies and the members largely conformist; 
other organisations may prize individualism and be less hierarchical.
e.  Specialist roles.   People make assumptions about individual ability based 
on their specialisation, rather than knowledge about their competence or 
61  Ibid., page 167.
When responding to crises, we will need to build trust and work with a wide range of actors
Decision-making

56
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
motives.  Role-based trust is also described as assumed competence; for 
example, most people trust doctors to care for their health.
f. Personal contact.  Personal contact is vital for building trust within newly 
formed, multi-disciplinary teams.
The role of judgement in the decision-making process 
2.38. Judgement is a key element of decision-making and requires experience  
and practise.  Judgement can be exercised through a collaborative (deliberate) 
process, through intuition, or a combination of both.  Deliberate judgement is a 
command-led staff process considering all of the facts and determining the options 
before the commander makes a decision.  Intuition is the ability to understand 
something without the need for conscious reasoning.  Intuition may appear 
subconscious; however, ‘intuitive’ decision-making is based on intellect, experience, 
education and training which enables decision-makers to recognise patterns, 
problems and solutions.  Intuition is subject to the individual’s own biases, insecurities 
and idiosyncrasies borne of experience.  
Managing risk
2.39. Understanding can help us to identify risk, as well as actions we can take  
to mitigate risk.  Risk management is an important part of decision-making.   
Decision-makers may become risk-averse when they have insufficient understanding 
of a given situation.  They may also take greater risk when they believe they have 
achieved a ‘full’ understanding.  
Communicating understanding
2.40. Communicating understanding is an important element of the  
decision-making process.  Creating a clear vision and intent is articulating foresight, 
the primary outcome of understanding.  At the strategic and operational level, the 
commander’s intent determines campaign design, how we prosecute the campaign 
or operations, how we allocate resources and the operational priorities.  
2.41. At the tactical level, intent provides the rationale for personnel to fight and 
to know why they are fighting.  Vision and intent also form the narrative, which 
Section 5 – Advice to commanders
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
57
2
can be general or specific, tailored for an internal or external audience and can 
be communicated by a number of means.  The narrative will evolve over time as 
understanding and the situation changes. 
Network exploitation
2.42. Systematic exploitation of available networks, 
and identifying the future potential of emerging 
networks, is critical to developing understanding 
and to communicating it.  Commanders need to 
develop their own informal and formal networks 
to gain information and have their understanding 
of a particular situation scrutinised and tested.  
Knowledge is often thought to be synonymous 
with power, and not always shared freely in large 
organisations.  The need to challenge views and 
perceptions underpins understanding and this cannot 
always be achieved by accepting the institutional 
status quo.  A careful balance must be struck between 
using formal and informal networks to enable 
understanding.  However, the value inherent in using 
open-minded informal networks often outweighs the 
disadvantages.
Continuous review
2.43. Understanding requires continuous review.  The decision-making process 
provides a useful vehicle for enabling review through monitoring and evaluation, 
particularly after action has been taken.  This allows further analysis to enhance our 
understanding.  The staff environment at each level should incorporate a formal 
continuous review process that is properly resourced.
Prioritisation and task allocation 
2.44. Conducting operations with limited resources demands careful prioritisation 
and allocation of tasks.  Leaders at all levels – political leaders, military commanders 
and those with the ability and authority to direct a particular group – will usually 
have resources at their disposal dedicated specifically to developing understanding.  
Effectively using these resources will require commanders to articulate what needs 
to be understood.  Subordinates should be willing (and able) to add or challenge the 
commander’s requirements, based on their own understanding of the situation.  
Section 5 – Advice to commanders
There is a need to challenge the views of others
Decision-making

58
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
Cognitive readiness  
2.45. Commanders should consider their own as well as their staff’s cognitive 
readiness.  This requires assessing the ability to: 
• recognise patterns in chaotic situations; 
• modify problem solutions in the light of a changing situation; and 
• execute plans based upon these solutions.62   
In the same way that analytical and creative reasoning can be tested, the brain can 
also be trained.
Avoiding cognitive pitfalls – mitigation strategies 
2.46. Some mitigation of cognitive pitfalls is possible through good mental hygiene 
and habits.  Commanders should consider: 
• their physical fitness;
• their willingness to change their mind;
• embracing uncertainty and working with it;
• using prompts, frameworks and checklists to explore different perspectives;
• seeking out and challenging assumptions – not doing so is one of the most  
 common pitfalls;
• always seeking alternatives, not stopping at the first good idea;  
• using competing hypotheses rather than seeking evidence to support a  
 preferred theory;
• using one-to-one dialogue with a trusted, but culturally different person to  
 stimulate constructive thinking;
• being emotionally self-conscious in decision-making; and
• checking for the effects of bias and heuristics.
62 Fletcher J D, Cognitive Readiness: Preparing for the Unexpected , Institute for Defense Analyses 
Document D-3061, September 2004.
In the same 
way that 
analytical 
and creative 
reasoning can 
be tested, the 
brain can also 
be trained.
”
“
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
59
2
Intuition as recognition
Commanders in the United States National Fire Department are required to make 
decisions under conditions of uncertainty and time pressure that preclude any orderly 
effort to generate and evaluate sets of options.  Klein, Calderwood and Clinton-Cirocco 
(1986) investigated: 
‘how the commanders could make good decisions without comparing options.  
The initial hypothesis was that commanders would restrict their analysis to 
only a pair of options, but that hypothesis proved to be incorrect.  In fact, the 
commanders usually generated only a single option, and that was all they needed.  
They could draw on the repertoire of patterns that they had compiled during 
more than a decade of both real and virtual experience to identify a plausible 
option, which they considered first.  They evaluated this option by mentally 
simulating it to see if it would work in the situation they were facing.  If the course 
of action they were considering seemed appropriate, they would implement 
it.  If it had shortcomings, they would modify it.  If they could not easily modify 
it, they would turn to the next most plausible option and run through the same 
procedure until an acceptable course of action was found.’
Thinking Fast and Slow 
Daniel Kahneman 63 
Choosing the right approach – analysis or intuition?
2.47. Conscious processes are particularly good for analytical thinking, and we 
recognise and use conscious analysis as the main approach to problem solving.  
Many of the tools and techniques we deploy support this kind of thinking.  We tend 
to neglect, however, the kind of thinking provided by unconscious processes, which 
are particularly good for dealing with large amounts of information, complexity, 
ambiguity and volatility.  When we do use unconscious processes, for example, 
in the form of intuition or creativity, it is often ad hoc and fortuitous.  In some 
situations, especially when there is a need to understand and influence other people, 
unconscious processes are very effective and commanders should learn to exploit 
them.
63  Kahneman D, Thinking Fast and Slow , 2011.
Decision-making

60
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
2.48. To ensure an effective balance of thinking skills for any particular situation, 
commanders can:
• monitor staff over-reliance on analytical thinking;
• employ techniques such as brainstorming that support unconscious 
thinking and trigger lateral thinking, innovation and new insights;
• assign staff with particular thinking styles or skills to roles and teams; and
• diagnose their own, their staffs’, partners’ and adversaries’ thinking to 
exploit or mitigate strengths and weaknesses.64
Group cultures  
2.49. Shared cultures within military groups may reinforce cohesion under stress 
and contribute towards the moral component of fighting power.  However, group 
culture can be destructive when disparate groups are brought together, even when 
working towards a common aim.  Problems could include:  
• antipathy between separate groups developing before they meet; or  
• a clash of different group cultures inhibiting creativity, distorting  
decision-making or making people reluctant to voice different opinions. 
Diverse groups 
2.50. Diverse groups typically consist of members who do not recognise formal 
structures or authority.  Leaders of diverse groups tend to emerge naturally, 
particularly if they begin as strict conformers but later start to lead in a new direction 
attractive to other members.  In contrast, leaders within the military and other agency 
groups are appointed and while they can establish their credibility, authority and 
responsibility within their own hierarchies, they may have to earn this within the 
wider groups that typically respond to complex problems.
Group size  
2.51. In large groups, individuals may be able to ‘hide’ or fail to recognise the 
importance of any one task.  Also, key contributions can be lost where the dynamics 
64 Dahl A B, Command Dysfunction: Minding The Cognitive War , Thesis, School of Advanced Airpower 
Studies, Air University, Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama, 1996.
Diverse groups 
typically 
consist of 
members 
who do not 
recognise 
formal structures 
or authority.
”
“
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
61
2
Brainstorming – A note of caution
Brainstorming may produce fewer new ideas and less innovation than when people work 
in isolation.  Operating within the group environment, especially in large groups, can lead 
to individuals contributing less than they might if working on their own.  This is often the 
case with introverts, potentially some of the deepest thinkers in a group, who will be less 
likely to project alternative ideas than their more extrovert colleagues.  In addition, many 
individuals are apprehensive within a group environment owing to a perception that they 
are being evaluated.  Even when brainstorming conventions are clearly articulated, some 
individuals may feel that others are scrutinising their input.  Overall, large groups may be 
more effective when evaluating ideas, rather than creating them.  Group members might 
be tasked to generate ideas before the meeting and leaders should mediate discussion 
about those ideas to allow the group to evaluate the options.  Participant involvement in 
the evaluation process may also help to build consensus on the final outcome. 
of a large group inhibit discussion.  Group sizes must be managed to ensure that all 
participants are both seen and able to contribute.
Dysfunctional group decision-making
2.52.  Other factors can make group approaches to decision-making dysfunctional. 
a. Initial preferences can become exaggerated during group discussions, a 
phenomenon known as group polarisation.  This can be limited by avoiding 
uniformity in the composition of the group.  
b.  Group behaviour may inhibit the ability to share information effectively.  
Rather than revealing vital information known only to them, individual team 
members may talk about things that everybody already knows.  We can reduce 
this counter-productive behaviour by disciplined pre-meeting routines that 
expose what is already known and establish clear boundaries for what the 
meeting intends to achieve.
Group roles  
2.53.  Groups have norms or rules that apply to every member, but they often 
have specific roles and corresponding rules that apply to sub-groups within them.  
Individuals may be susceptible to group conformity and external pressures when 
adopting such roles, and may adapt their behaviour to conform to views other than 
their own.  Contributory factors include the fear of disapproval from others, a lack of 
self-belief or the need to avoid confrontation. 
Decision-making

62
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2
 
Key points  
• Understanding informs decision-making and it follows that the better our  
 understanding, the better-informed our decisions will be.
• The typical breadth of inter-agency and multinational engagement increases the  
 complexity of problem solving, but diverse perspectives across a complex network  
 can also generate significant opportunities. 
• Problems at the operational level of command tend to be less-structured and may  
 require divergent thinking to provide novel or creative solutions.
• Unless we have some awareness of how we think, we cannot begin to mitigate  
 potentially adverse effects. 
• There are a number of factors that can affect how teams develop perceptions,  
 construct meaning, judge, decide and act.  These include:
 Ĕ peers pressure;
 Ĕ groupthink;
 Ĕ social prejudice; and  
 Ĕ education and culture.
• Psychological research generally focuses on two main types of thinking – intuitive  
 and analytical.
• Those dealing with complex and uncertain situations requires a range of thinking  
 skills and the ability to get the best thinking from their organisation. 
• Good teams provide balanced, critical advice, and provide the staff functions that  
 enable the commander time to think.  
• Judgement can be exercised through a collaborative (deliberate) process, through  
 intuition, or a combination of both.
• Understanding requires continuous review.
• Group culture can be destructive when disparate groups are brought together,  
 even when working towards a common aim.
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
63
2A
Annex 2A – Organisational 
learning and adaptation
2A.1.  Organisational learning is critical to avoid repeating failure.  Organisations 
identify lessons from their own experiences and from the experiences of others, 
but organisational learning involves codifying those lessons in modified or new 
organisational routines.  Militaries express their routines in doctrine, training and 
standard operating procedures that allow them to act in a coordinated and effective 
way in often highly dynamic and chaotic situations, where failure can have fatal 
consequences.
Organisational learning  
2A.2.  Learning is difficult for most organisations, especially if it challenges routines, 
special interests and cultural norms.  These factors will often lead the organisation to 
reject or ignore important lessons.  Organisational learning also requires tolerance of 
criticism, both internal and external.  However, militaries are hierarchical organisations 
and can be resistant to internal questioning or dissent.  Militaries also tend to be 
sensitive to external criticism, especially from civilians lacking military experience. 
Adaptation and innovation
2A.3.  Organisational learning should lead to adaptation and, if necessary, 
innovation.  Military adaptation involves incremental changes to tactics, techniques, 
procedures, structures and equipment to improve performance.  However, adaptation 
is sometimes insufficient and militaries must innovate to retain their advantage over 
potential adversaries.  Innovation often involves large-scale changes, requiring a mix 
of doctrinal, structural and technological change.  
2A.4. Innovation questions the routines and systems that underpin core 
competencies, which can deteriorate quickly without rigorous training, exercises 
and experience on operations.  Innovation may be viewed as threatening existing 
capabilities in which militaries have made heavy investment and around which 
sub-community interests and cultures have developed.  However, organisational 
innovation is crucial if we are to develop the capacity to anticipate and prepare for the 
future characteristics of conflict.
Decision-making

64
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2A
Centralised versus decentralised organisations
2A.5. Unhindered by bureaucracy and process, the relatively decentralised 
organisational structure of irregular opponents may enable them to learn and adapt 
faster than our own highly centralised structures.  Similarly, fewer, less well-defined 
routines should make them more responsive to their environments, with a faster 
learning capacity.  Organisation-wide application of lessons and the ability to codify 
and disseminate them relies on organisation and a large repertoire of competencies 
and capabilities.  Irregular organisations will vary in their ability to adapt; some will be 
highly adaptive, others will be surprisingly slow to adapt and make persistent tactical 
errors.  However, militaries are usually slow to innovate and irregular opponents 
may enjoy the advantage of not being bound by narrow organisational interests 
defending existing ways of operating.  They also often lack cultural and bureaucratic 
obstacles to innovation.  In summary, decentralised organisations tend to be fast 
learners and are better at innovating than adapting; centralised organisations are 
better at organisation-wide learning and adapting.
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
65
2B
Annex 2B – Biases and heuristics: why 
we think the way we do
Attention  
Attention allows us to direct our conscious thinking in different ways according to our needs.  We can concentrate with a 
narrow focus to read detail or to apply analytical rigour, or look more widely and superficially to remain alert to the broader environment.  Attention (and therefore conscious thinking) has a limited capacity, being able to deal with no more than about seven items at a time.   
A useful characteristic of the way the brain handles information is that an item can contain variable amounts of 
information, so long as you can conceptually chunk the information into one construct.  So, ‘4 8 7’ could be either three items as the numbers four, eight and seven or one item as the number 487.  A significant part of expertise in many fields is the ability to chunk information into meaningful complex items that can be remembered and recognised.
Subconscious 
pre-filtering of 
data 
Pre-filtering data that we acquire through our senses can sensitise us to things that are important so that we only focus mental effort on relevant factors.  This is a subconscious function of which we are not aware of doing.  It explains why we are not very good at discovering the unexpected as we tend to see what we expect to see and find what we are looking for.  
While looking for a certain person in a crowd, you are less likely to notice other factors such as the proportion of  
middle-aged people, the predominant colour of clothing or even another person whom you happen to know.  While  
pre-filtering affords us mental efficiency in many situations, it can be a weakness in others. 
Bias  
The human tendency to be biased has evolved to allow us to achieve our objectives more efficiently by pre-disposing us to 
give more weight to information that leads us in a desired direction.  We are unaware of many of our biases, which contain both innate and learned aspects.   They can be counterproductive if our biases influence us in the wrong direction and lead us to discount or over-weight evidence.  In such circumstances, we should take steps to apply a counter-weight, such as someone with the opposite bias, or by using an objective measure.
Decision-making

66
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2B
Bias (continued)
Listening and hearing are worthwhile skills, even if you find the source or the subject irritating.  Our genetic potential, 
formative experiences and learning all strongly influence our cognitive (mental activity or thinking) abilities.  They also give rise to unconscious influence through biases that serve to influence the way in which we think.  Examples of bias include the following.
• Confirmation bias.  Confirmation bias is the tendency to search for or interpret new information in a way that 
confirms one's preconceptions, or to irrationally avoid information or reject new evidence that contradicts an 
established view.  This is especially pertinent to developing intelligence where any failure to rigorously analyse 
competing hypotheses can introduce confirmation bias.
• Optimism bias.  Optimism bias is a systematic tendency for over-optimism about the outcome of a planned 
course of action.  This includes over-estimating the likelihood of the positive and under-estimating the likelihood of the negative.  This is one reason why contingency planning, rehearsal of concept drills and red teaming are so 
important; branches and sequels in operational planning hedge against such over-optimism.
• Bandwagon effect.  The bandwagon effect is the tendency to do or believe things because others do or believe 
the same.  Cultures within military hierarchies for senior-subordinate relationships vary from an expectation of 
blind obedience to one that encourages open challenge or concepts of loyal opposition.  Commanders must exercise care when working across national cultural lines and foster an open culture that encourages subordinates 
and seniors to test the accepted wisdom to safeguard against the bandwagon effect.
• Premature closure.  The human need for closure varies between individuals, situations and cultures.  Those with 
a high need for closure prefer order and predictability, and are decisive, but more likely to have a closed mind at a critical juncture.  They can be good in a crisis, but tend to dislike ambiguity; they will seek to make rapid decisions even if the information supporting that decision is of relatively poor quality.  Those with a low need for closure will tend to express more open-mindedness and be more creative.  Organisational and time pressures can reinforce the need for closure and a formal commitment to a course of action may result in a vested interest in maintaining the position.
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
67
2B
Bias (continued)
• False certainty effect.  The false certainty effect inclines us to make risk-averse choices if the expected outcome 
is positive and risk-seeking choices if the outcome is negative.  Experiments show that how such choices are 
presented will influence our choices, with clear implications for the way in which we articulate risk.  
• Hyperbolic discounting.   Hyperbolic discounting is a tendency to prefer more immediate pay-offs.  Often 
associated with economic gains, it is proven as a psychological phenomenon with implications for military 
planning.  Commanders should prepare to invest in longer-term, higher pay-off strategies rather than the 
proven tendency to bias towards the short-term pay-off.  This is a significant issue in security and stabilisation, but relatively short operational tours and political imperatives can create pressure to seek short-term (but lower overall yield) pay-offs.
• Information.   We tend to seek too much information even when it cannot influence a course of action or analysts 
already have more than they can digest.  Analysts often need more useful information – such as reliable human 
intelligence – to develop better understanding.   Information supporting an existing hypothesis reinforces this 
bias; information that weakens it is often judged unreliable or anomalous.
• Choice supportive.  We tend to remember our choices as better than they actually were or to view our past 
performance through ‘rose-tinted glasses’.  Surveys indicate that we generally perceive our own actions as the cause of our successes, but not of our failures.  Self-awareness that this is the case is the only safeguard.
• Blind spot.   Some people fail to compensate for blind spots in their own cognitive biases, even when aware of 
them.  Open planning cultures and thorough staff procedures are good defences.
• Distinction.   Distinction is a tendency to view two options as more dissimilar when evaluating them 
simultaneously than when evaluating them separately.  This has implications when reviewing and selecting operational courses of action.
Decision-making

68
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2B
Bias (continued)
• Extreme aversion.  Extreme aversion is an inclination to avoid extremes by choosing an option that is an 
intermediate choice.  This can also affect course of action selection if there are obvious extremes of risk between 
the proposed courses.
• Focusing effect.  People can focus too intently on one aspect of an event, introducing errors in predicting the 
overall utility of a future outcome.
• Irrational escalation.  This is a tendency to make irrational decisions based upon rational decisions in the past or to 
justify actions already taken. 
• Mere exposure.  Mere exposure effect is a predisposition to express undue liking for things because of familiarity.  
Commanders should guard against a natural tendency to engage too deeply in subject matters with which they 
are familiar or expert; their comfort zones.
• Neglect of probability.  Neglect of probability is an inclination to disregard probability when making decisions 
under uncertainty.
• Omission.  Omission is a tendency to judge harmful actions as worse or less moral than equally harmful omissions 
or inactions.  Commanders must on occasion be cruel to be kind and show the moral courage to take difficult, but necessary, action.
• Zero-risk bias.  There is a preference for reducing a small risk to zero over a larger but incomplete reduction of a 
bigger risk.
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
69
2B
Heuristics
Heuristics are cognitive rules of thumb that allow us to make the rapid mental calculations that are necessary for quick 
decisions and responses.  They are shortcuts, tried and tested in survival situations, but as they lack rigour they do not work in all situations.  They act as a sort of mental anchor that makes it difficult to escape their influence.  For example, in many cases a quick estimate of the frequency of an event is sufficient to get an idea of how likely it is to occur, so you do not need to go to the trouble of calculating a statistical probability.  It requires conscious thinking and significant effort to overcome such an innate rule of thumb and disassociate, in this example, frequency with probability. 
Our brains attempt to avoid cognitive overload by using learned or innate thinking strategies known as heuristics.
65   These 
mental shortcuts reduce the burden on cognitive resources but have significant limitations and risks.  
• Anchoring and adjustment.   Our brains often anchor mentally onto specific information or values and adjust 
for other factors.  This could occur, for example, when an intelligence analyst or a commander moves to a new 
appointment and is responsible for updating judgements or estimates made by a predecessor.  The previous 
analyst’s work acts as an anchor and, once set, it introduces an unconscious shift toward that value and a tendency 
to give other aspects of the problem insufficient weight. 
• Availability, similarity or familiarity.   Availability, similarity and familiarity are technically discrete but practically 
similar heuristics describing how we associate past experiences with a current situation.  They can explain how we tend to predict the frequency of an event depending on how easily an example can be brought to mind.  For example, if asked to rate the probability of a variety of causes of death we tend to rate newsworthy causes as more likely because we can more readily recall an example from memory.  Recent media coverage can therefore 
influence our choice of example and leads to flawed judgement.  Over-reliance on current or recent operational 
experience falls into this category.  Although past experience can bring significant value, we must apply it in the correct context.
65  A method of solving a problem, for which no formula exists, based on informal methods or experience.
Decision-making

70
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2B
Heuristics 
(continued)
• Naive diversification.  If asked to make several choices at once we tend to diversify more than if making the same 
type of decisions sequentially.   Thus, three courses of action developed simultaneously by a commander to 
answer an operational problem will be illogically more diverse than three developed sequentially. 
• Affect.  Individual feelings can affect the decisions we take.  Feelings such as fear or happiness are shorter in 
duration than moods and can occur rapidly and involuntarily in response to a stimulus.  This is particularly relevant to our perception of the risks associated with a course of action.  A positive affect could lead to a perception of lower risk and higher benefit, even when illogical for the situation.  The implication is that a strong emotional response to a stimulus can alter our judgement and decision-making, even if subsequent facts weigh against it.  Safeguards might include sleeping on the problem to allow re-appreciation, without the emotion that accompanied its initial inception.
• Recognition.  If we recognise one of two objects, but not the other, we infer that the recognised object has the 
higher value.  This heuristic applies more broadly to comparison of the relative frequency of two categories.  If we recognise one category, but not the other we can wrongly conclude that the recognised category has a higher frequency of occurrence.  Narrow experience exacerbates this and the study of military history is a reasonable, if limited, mitigation technique.
• Contagion.  The contagion heuristic leads us to avoid dealing with people, objects or facts associated by previous 
experience with someone or something considered bad.  Less frequently, it can lead to association with people, objects or facts that have been in contact with people or things considered good.
• Effort.  The effort heuristic reflects the tendency to assign a value to something based on the amount of 
perceived effort that went into producing it, for example, deep personal involvement in an intelligence hypothesis or an operational course of action.  Alternatively, if a goal is of little importance the amount of effort we are willing to put into it will be lower.
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
71
2B
Heuristics 
(continued)
• Peak-end rule.   We judge our past experiences almost entirely on how they were at their peak − pleasant or 
unpleasant − and how they ended.  Other information, including the net pleasantness or unpleasantness and how 
long the experience lasted, is not lost but it is generally not used for future judgements.
Subconscious 
sense-making
• Our subconscious processing is adept at creating links to make sense of situations.  Different ideas and memories, 
which may not have been related, are associated into new groupings, sometimes called patterns of meaning.  These processes have a particular knack for filling in where information is missing to create a pattern that makes 
sense.  This form of sense-making underpins our ability to make inferences, to be innovative and to understand 
the world.  Unfortunately, this great capacity for creating holistic patterns from pieces of information can also go 
wrong when our strong drive to make sense causes imperfect memories to be reconstructed and false memories 
can be created.  
• We occasionally make sense of something suddenly without knowing how and label it intuition, insight or 
creativity.  This is the product of subconscious sense-making.  It may be the result of a build up of experience providing effective patterns (which is typical of a commander’s intuition), or it may be the result of an instant connection made subconsciously that completes a new pattern: the ‘light bulb moment’.
Decision-making

72
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
2B
Notes
Decision-making

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
73
Lexicon
Acronyms and abbreviations
AAP   Allied administrative publication  
AJP  Allied joint publication
DCDC   Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
FSA   full spectrum approach
ISAF   International Security Assistance Force
JDN  joint doctrine note 
JDP  joint doctrine publication 
JIPOE   joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment
MOD  Ministry of Defence
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization
RAF  Royal Air Force
Lexicon

74
JDP 04 (2nd Edition) 
Terms and definitions
collective understanding 
The shared perspective held by members of distinct groups who have their own 
ethos, creed and identity.  (JDP 04)
common understanding 
The ability to comprehend perceptions of groups other than our own and to establish 
a common baseline for communication, interpretation and action.  (JDP 04)
creative thinking 
The examination of problems or situations from an original or unorthodox 
perspective.  (JDP 04)
critical analysis 
The intellectual discipline that applies deliberate introspective judgement to 
interpret, analyse and evaluate a problem and explain the context upon which that 
judgement is based.  (JDP 04)
Defence Engagement 
The means by which we use our Defence assets and activities, short of combat 
operations, to achieve influence.  (JDN 1/15)
fusion 
In intelligence usage, fusion is the blending of intelligence and/or information 
from multiple sources or agencies into a coherent picture.  The origin of the initial 
individual items should then no longer be apparent.  (AAP-06)
hard power 
The threat or use of military or economic coercion or physical effect to achieve 
influence.  (JDP 04)
horizon scanning 
In intelligence usage, horizon scanning is the systematic search across the global 
environment for potential threats, hazards and opportunities.  (JDP 04)
individual understanding 
The personal interpretation of the facts held by a person within their own mind.   
(JDP 04)
Lexicon

JDP 04 (2nd Edition)
75
operating environment  
A composite of the conditions, circumstances and influences that affect the 
employment of capabilities and bear on the decisions of the commanders.  (AAP-06)
situational awareness  
Generically, the understanding of the operational environment in the context of a 
commander’s (or staff officer’s) mission (or task).  (JDP 0-01.1)
soft power  
The ability to persuade or encourage others to adopt an alternative approach.   
(JDP 04)
understanding  
In the context of decision-making, understanding is the perception and interpretation 
of a particular situation in order to provide the context, insight and foresight required 
for effective decision-making.  (JDP 04)
Lexicon

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 12/16
Published by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
Understanding and Decision-makingSecond Edition

