Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
UK Maritime Power
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-10 
Fifth Edition

[Page 2: No extractable text]

Joint Doctrine Publication 0-10
UK Maritime Power
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-10 (JDP 0-10) (5th Edition),
dated October 2017 , 
is promulgated 
as directed by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Concepts and Doctrine
i
Conditions of release
1.  This information is Crown copyright.  The Ministry of Defence (MOD) exclusively 
owns the intellectual property rights for this publication.  You are not to forward, 
reprint, copy, distribute, reproduce, store in a retrieval system, or transmit its 
information outside the MOD without VCDS’ permission.
2.  This information may be subject to privately owned rights.

ii
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
Authorisation
 
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for publishing 
strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine.  If you wish to quote our publications 
as reference material in other work, you should confirm with our editors whether the 
particular publication and amendment state remains authoritative.  We welcome your 
comments on factual accuracy or amendment proposals.  Please send them to:
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Ministry of Defence Shrivenham 
SWINDON 
Wiltshire 
SN6 8RF 
Telephone:                  01793 31 4216/4217/4220  
Military network:      96161 4216/4217/4220  
E-mail:       DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk 
All images, or otherwise stated are: © Crown copyright/MOD 2017. 
Distribution
 
Distributing Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-10 (5th Edition) is managed by the 
Forms and Publications Section, LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre, C16 Site, 
Ploughley Road, Arncott, Bicester, OX25 1LP .  All of our other publications, including 
a regularly updated DCDC Publications Disk, can also be demanded from the LCSLS 
Operations Centre. 
LCSLS Help Desk:    01869 256197
Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on the Defence Intranet (RLI) at: 
http://defenceintranet.diif.r.mil.uk/Organisations/Orgs/JFC/Organisations/Orgs/DCDC  
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
iii
Foreword
We are living through an era of almost unprecedented change characterised by 
complexity, instability, uncertainty and the pervasiveness of information.  The 
distinction between war and peace has blurred and adversaries, both state and  
non-state, will continue to threaten the stability of the rules-based order as the basis 
for peace and prosperity in the world.  Reflecting this complexity and instability, we 
are witness to greater challenges at sea; ranging from smuggling, piracy and terrorism 
in the arteries of world trade to disputes over the sovereignty of international waters.  
As an island nation, and a trading power, our future continues to depend on our 
ability to freely use the sea within the boundaries of international law.
The growing complexity of these challenges calls for us to work ever more closely 
with our sister Services and with our international partners.  As mariners, we in the 
Royal Navy, the Royal Marines and the Royal Fleet Auxiliary instinctively appreciate 
the importance of our ability to use the sea to protect, project and promote our 
national interest.  The sea provides us with the ability to project forward a war 
fighting presence without commitment.  We must be ever vigilant, whether 
protecting our home waters, meeting our international commitments or promoting 
our nation’s interests far from our home shores.  In each case, the need to deter is 
constant – and when deterrence fails, we must be ready to fight and win.       
This keystone environmental doctrine explores the requirement, roles and purpose 
of UK maritime power.  It builds on the collective experience of previous editions 
and provides a corporate knowledge that defines the Naval Service.  In preparing 
ourselves for the challenges of the future we must be masters of our current 
profession but have an awareness of what has gone before.  History and experience 
have a place in forming our plans for the future but as a guide not a constraint.  This 
doctrine exists to help us understand, to learn from history but more importantly to 
think about and prepare for the challenges of the future.  It has been written primarily 
for joint staffs, officials, allies and partners in industry.  I encourage you to read it 
as a framework for understanding how maritime forces perform their vital role in 
protecting our nation.
Chief of Naval Staff/First Sea Lord


iv
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)


JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
v
Preface
Purpose
1.  Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-10, UK Maritime Power is the keystone maritime 
environment publication.  Drawing authority from JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine , 
which provides a broad philosophy on how Defence is employed, UK Maritime 
Power brings together higher-level doctrine and Government policy, with enduring 
maritime knowledge and experience.  It provides a basis of understanding of the 
attributes and roles of maritime forces, and principally is designed to explain the 
strategic requirement for maritime forces, and how they contribute to national power.
Context
2. The UK is an island nation and with that comes a maritime heritage that is 
woven into our national history.  While this means that there is an inherent reliance 
on the sea it also provides opportunities to use the sea in the pursuit of national 
objectives.  The critical importance of the maritime environment to the UK’s economy 
is addressed in detail later.  As the National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and 
Security Review 2015 noted, our economic security depends on our national security, 
and vice versa, clearly indicating that any national strategy must pay due regard to the 
importance of the maritime environment to the UK’s enduring prosperity.
Scope
3.  This fifth edition of JDP 0-10 draws on previous versions for enduring concepts 
but looks to continue the joint theme initiated in the fourth edition.  Supporting this 
joint approach it seeks to generate consistency across its sister publications; JDP 0-20, 
UK Land Power and JDP 0-30, UK Air and Space Power , which has led to developing a 
revised structure.  In addition, advice from numerous stakeholders has led us to revise 
and develop some of the traditional themes.  Specifically, this edition:
• provides a new broader definition for maritime power and discusses military 
maritime power as a subset of this wider concept;
• continues the joint nature of the maritime environment, namely it is not just 
the preserve of navies;


vi
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
• re-examines the traditional attributes and roles in the maritime environment; 
and
• demonstrates how maritime forces contribute to joint action.
To ensure consistency across the maritime, land, air and space environments, the 
content has been collated and verified from a wide range of sources.  The results have 
then been rigorously peer reviewed and validated, and endorsed by all three Services 
and Joint Forces Command.
Audience
4. This edition of JDP 0-10 seeks to inform a wide audience.  It should be of particular 
value to the Joint Services Command and Staff College, joint commanders and staffs, 
the broader Defence community and our allies, as well as elected representatives and 
other government departments. 
Structure
5. JDP 0-10 is divided into four chapters.
a. Chapter 1 – An introduction to maritime power.  Chapter 1 introduces the 
maritime environment and explains why maritime power is important to the 
UK.  It introduces and defines maritime power, provides an overview of the wider 
maritime environment and the enduring utility of maritime forces.
b. Chapter 2 – Maritime power in context.  Chapter 2 introduces the dimensions 
of the maritime environment and explains why the maritime environment is 
globally important.  It then focuses on national considerations and discusses how 
maritime forces contribute to national security objectives. 
c. Chapter 3 – The foundations of maritime power.  Chapter 3 builds on the 
military dimension of maritime power.  Initially presenting the aspects of fighting 
power provided in JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, it then introduces the inherent 
attributes of maritime forces, while also highlighting some of the limitations 
of operating in the maritime environment.  Finally, Chapter 3 describes the 
principles that underpin the way maritime forces operate to project national 
maritime power.


JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
vii
d. Chapter 4 – Employing maritime power.  Chapter 4 examines the three 
roles of UK maritime forces – war fighting, maritime security and Defence 
Engagement – and how they come together with the other elements of military 
power to deliver joint action and the roles they undertake to support national 
objectives.
Linkages
6. JDP 0-10, UK Maritime Power provides keystone maritime environment doctrine 
within the UK Joint Doctrine Architecture, drawing from JDP 0-01, UK Defence 
Doctrine (5th Edition) and sitting alongside existing joint environmental doctrine, JDP 
0-20, UK Land Power and JDP 0-30, UK Air and Space Power .  It is also founded upon 
an understanding of current policy, in particular the National Security Strategy and 
Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 and The UK National Strategy for Maritime 
Security.  JDP 0-10 is coherent with North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
capstone doctrine, Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine  and AJP 3.1, 
Allied Joint Maritime Operations.  JDP 0-10 also complements the Royal Navy’s Book of 
Reference (digital) 4487 , The Fighting Instructions series.


JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
viii

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
ix
Contents
Foreword   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . iii
Preface  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . v
Chapter 1 – An introduction to maritime power  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1
Chapter 2 – Maritime power in context   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9
Chapter 3 – The foundations of maritime power  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  27
Chapter 4 – Employing maritime power  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  49
Lexicon .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  67


JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
x


An introduction to 
maritime power
Chapter 1 introduces the maritime environment and 
explains why maritime power is important to the UK.  It 
introduces and defines maritime power, provides an 
overview of the wider maritime environment and the 
enduring utility of maritime forces.
Chapter 1
1
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
1


2
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
12
An introduction to maritime power
“
”
...2017 is the start of a new era of 
maritime power, projecting Britain’s 
influence globally and delivering 
security at home.
 
Sir Michael Fallon, 
Defence Secretary 

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
3
13
1.1.  UK maritime forces are deployed 365 days a year across the world to provide 
a forward national presence that projects influence to safeguard our interests.  This 
is a tempo and pattern of operational deployments that has persisted since before 
the Royal Navy was formally established in 1660.  Although often obscured by an 
apparently shrinking, but increasingly interconnected, complex and uncertain 
globalised world, the UK was, and remains, a maritime state.1  The UK National Strategy 
for Maritime Security2 acknowledges this and reinforces that as a nation we continue to 
depend on the sea for our prosperity and security to a high degree, relative to other 
states, and that it is critical to sustaining our way of life.  Supporting this, the National 
Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015, while painting a world 
of persistent competition, emphasises that our national security depends on our 
economic security, and vice versa. 3  Combined, these factors highlight the national 
requirement to influence and shape the maritime environment in pursuit of the UK’s 
national objectives.
Maritime power
1.2.  Maritime power is an inherently broad concept, founded on a state’s maritime 
tradition and dependency.  It encompasses a number of economic, political, military 
and influence elements, realised through the ability of a state to use the sea.4  As  
such it straddles the three levers of national power – diplomatic, economic and 
1 Department of Transport, Our Maritime Nation: Achievements and Challenges , March 2015, available 
at https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/410714/150309_
Maritime_Lflt-ACCESSIBLE__1_.PDF
2 Her Majesty’s Government (HMG), The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security , May 2014, available at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-strategy-for-maritime-security
3 National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015, A Secure and Prosperous United 
Kingdom, available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-security-strategy-and-
strategic-defence-and-security-review-2015
4 Ian Speller, Understanding Naval Warfare , 2014.
Chapter 1 – An introduction 
to maritime power
‘The sea is the lifeblood of our economy.’
The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security
An introduction to maritime power

4
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
14
military – underpinned by information.5  Maritime power is therefore a measure of 
the total national engagement with the sea, the capacity to operate there and the 
ability to exploit it.  It cannot be accurately calculated because it includes intangible 
elements such as culture, identity and mythology.6  Maritime power, therefore, is not 
solely a military calculation as it includes, but is not limited to:
•  the value of maritime trade as a percentage of national economic output;
• dependence on overseas resource supply;
• total manpower engaged in shipping;
• offshore economic interests – including oil and gas, fishing, renewable energy 
installations;
• shipyards, docks and ports; and
• all other sea-related economic activity ashore.
Military maritime power 
1.3. Consistent with North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) maritime doctrine,7 
this publication will refer to military maritime power as maritime power and is 
concerned specifically with the utility of military power at and from the sea.  Maritime 
power is defined as: the ability to apply maritime military capabilities at and from the 
sea to influence the behaviour of actors and the course of events.8
Maritime forces
1.4. Maritime forces are those operating at or from the sea.9  While the Naval Service 
is the principal actor in the maritime environment, maritime power is delivered by all 
of the UK military; the Royal Navy and Royal Marines, the British Army, the Royal Air 
Force (RAF) and Joint Forces Command.  Maritime power could therefore be delivered 
through British Army aviation assets operating from amphibious shipping, with Royal 
Marines and Army Commando personnel embarked, or Fleet Air Arm (FAA) and RAF 
fixed-wing aircraft operating from an aircraft carrier, delivering the carrier strike 
capability of Carrier Enabled Power Projection (CEPP). 
1.5. Similarly, land power, air and space power and cyber and electromagnetic 
activities (CEMA) also influence events in the maritime environment.  For example, 
5 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine,  5th Edition.
6 Professor Andrew Lambert, The Future of Maritime Power .
7 Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Maritime Operations , paragraph 1.3.
8 This is a new definition of maritime power and it will be added to the UK’s terminology glossary  
JDP 0-01.1, UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database, on promulgation.
9 UK maritime forces are deemed to be: the Naval Service which includes the Royal Navy (which 
includes the Surface Fleet, Submarine Service, Fleet Air Arm) and the Royal Marines, the Royal Fleet 
Auxiliary and also elements of the British Army and Royal Air Force operating from the maritime 
environment.  
An introduction to maritime power
While the 
Naval Service 
is the principal 
actor in the 
maritime 
environment, 
maritime power 
is delivered 
by all of the UK 
military.
”
“

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
5
15
aircraft such as maritime patrol aircraft operating from land bases over the sea 
to protect UK waters, land-based shore batteries guarding littoral regions or the 
interdiction of navigation satellites in space all have the ability to influence activities 
in the maritime environment.  
Maritime environment
1.6.  In the physical sense the maritime environment comprises the high seas, 
exclusive economic zones and territorial seas.  Within this description it is important 
to recognise that the maritime environment is multidimensional as maritime forces 
operate above,10 on and below the surface of the sea.  In addition, to fully appreciate 
the utility of maritime power it is also necessary to understand the littoral, particularly 
when considering how maritime power can be projected onto land from the sea.  
The littoral region is defined as: those land areas (and their adjacent areas and 
associated air space) that are susceptible to engagement and influence from the sea.11  
Conversely, it also includes those areas of the sea susceptible to engagement from the 
land, from both land and air forces.
10 AJP-3.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Maritime Operations , paragraph 1.20.
11 This is a modified definition proposed by this publication to replace the definition currently included 
in JDP 0-01.1, UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database, 8th Edition.
A Type 23 frigate ploughs through rough seas towards a United States tanker for replenishment
An introduction to maritime power

6
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
16
The enduring utility of maritime power
1.7. Maritime forces provide a national global presence through three classical 
roles – war fighting, maritime security12 and Defence Engagement.  The unique 
attributes of the maritime environment allow maritime forces to provide a persistent 
and versatile military capability free of the liability of extensive host-nation support.  
The long-standing principle of freedom of navigation in international waters allows 
maritime forces to poise without commitment, to project national influence and 
develop understanding,13 while remaining highly mobile to exploit opportunities or 
to counter emerging threats.  Ultimately maritime forces provide a mobile, responsive 
and persistent basis for military capabilities, which can rapidly move up and down a 
spectrum of soft and hard power14 options to support national objectives.
12 Maritime security operations includes activities such as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief 
(HADR), constabulary operations, counter piracy, counter-drug, counter people trafficking and  
non-combatant evacuation operations (NEO).
13 Understanding is defined as: the perception and interpretation of a particular situation in order to 
provide the context, insight and foresight required for effective decision-making.  JDP 04, Understanding 
and Decision-making, 2nd Edition.
14 Hard power is defined as: the threat or use of military or economic coercion or physical effect to 
achieve influence.   Soft power is defined as: the ability to persuade or encourage others to adopt an 
alternative approach.  The combination of hard and soft power is referred to as ‘smart power’.  JDP 04, 
Understanding and Decision-making, 2nd Edition.
HMS Ocean on operations in the Middle East in 2017
An introduction to maritime power

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
7
17
 
Key points  
• UK maritime forces are deployed 365 days a year across the world to provide a 
forward national presence that projects influence to safeguard our interests. 
• As an island nation the sea is the lifeblood of the UK’s economy. 
• Maritime power straddles the three levers of national power – diplomatic, 
economic and military – underpinned by information.
• Military maritime power is defined as: the ability to apply maritime military 
capabilities at and from the sea to influence the behaviour of actors and the 
course of events.
• Maritime power is not only applied in the maritime environment but also across 
the other environments as well.
• Maritime forces are those operating at or from the sea.
• Land power, air and space power, and cyber and electromagnetic activities also 
influence events in the maritime environment.
• In the physical sense the maritime environment comprises the high seas, 
exclusive economic zones and territorial seas.
• The three classical roles of maritime forces are: war fighting, maritime security 
and Defence Engagement.
• The long-standing principle of freedom of navigation in international waters 
allows maritime forces to poise without commitment, to project national 
influence and develop understanding.
An introduction to maritime power

[Page 20: No extractable text]

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
9
JDP X-XX (X Edition)
Maritime power  
in context
Chapter 2 introduces the dimensions of the maritime 
environment and explains why the maritime environment 
is globally important.  It then focuses on national 
considerations and discusses how maritime forces 
contribute to the national security objectives.
Chapter 2
2
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
Section 1 – The maritime environment   . . . . . . . . 11
Section 2 – The national context  . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

10
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
210
Maritime power in context
Section 1 – The maritime environment
The history of sea power is largely, 
though by no means solely, a narrative 
of contests between nations, of 
mutual rivalries, of violence frequently 
culminating in war. 
Alfred Thayer Mahan
“
”

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
11
2
Maritime power in context
Chapter 2 – Maritime 
power in context
2.1.  The volume of total trade that travels by sea supports the premise that the 
world’s economy is reliant upon a safe and secure maritime environment.  Nationally, 
as an island nation that views the sea as the lifeblood of its economy and therefore 
prosperity, it is important that we understand the vital role a safe, secure and reliable 
maritime environment plays in our economic and national security.  This chapter 
will explain: the ways in which the maritime environment is of significant global 
importance; why it is strategically vital for the UK; and that any complacency towards 
changes within it could have significant consequences for the UK’s prosperity.
2.2.  The National Security Strategy (NSS)  and Strategic Defence and Security Review 
(SDSR)  2015 recognises that the UK sits at the heart of the global rules-based 
international order that has provided stability to the world’s political and economic 
landscape since the end of World War II. 15  This stability is of common interest to all 
trading nations, with the maritime environment acting as the principal means of 
movement for over 80% of the world’s trade by volume, and over 70% by value.16  
Uncontested access to the world’s oceans is therefore a paramount concern to all the 
major economies.
2.3.  The importance of the sea is not only economic.  It is: a defensive barrier; a 
medium for transporting people as well as goods; a source of generating power 
in terms of both fossil fuels and renewable energy; a source of food; an area of 
recreation; and a huge proportion of the Earth’s surface that possesses areas that are 
yet to be fully explored.  Its importance can be viewed through economic, physical, 
legal, political and military dimensions as shown at Figure 2.1, each of which applies 
equally in the land, air and space and cyber environments.
15 National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015, A Secure and Prosperous 
United Kingdom (NSS and SDSR 2015), available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-
security-strategy-and-strategic-defence-and-security-review-2015
16  For more information see http://unctad.org
Section 1 – The maritime environment

12
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
212
Maritime power in context
Figure 2.1 – The dimensions of the maritime environment
The economic dimension
2.4. Notwithstanding the reliance of the global economy on the sea for the 
movement of goods, there are further factors within the economic dimension that 
offer benefit but also present areas of potential conflict.  Importantly, the world is in a 
stage of economic transition with many forecasting the long-term shift of economic 
wealth to South-East Asia, and the relative decline of the established powers of the 
West.17  While this is disputed by some it does highlight the importance of the sea as 
the dominant medium for trade between the West and South-East Asia.
2.5. Fossil fuels and minerals are an important resource in the maritime environment.  
New deposits of oil and gas, as well as mineral wealth, are discovered under the 
seabed each year, and improvements in technology will facilitate future exploitation.  
Access to these, whether found on the continental shelf or within an exclusive 
economic zone, is likely to be contentious.  For example, Russia, Norway and Canada 
have all laid competing claims to large areas of the resource-rich Arctic seabed.
2.6. Over one billion members of the global population are reliant on fish as their 
main source of protein.  Overfishing and unregulated fishing pose serious challenges 
not only to the sustainability of this resource, but to the economies of small-island 
and coastal states.  Somali piracy, for example, developed from fishermen defending 
coastal waters from illegal fishing.  Managing situations like this is both a regional and 
global concern.
17 NSS and SDSR 2015.
Economic
LegalPolitical
PhysicalMilitary
99% of global 
Internet traffic 
is dependent 
upon 
submarine 
cables rather 
than satellite 
transmission.
”
“

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
13
2
Maritime power in context
2 .7.  It is a widely unknown fact that 99% of global Internet traffic is dependent upon 
submarine cables rather than satellite transmission. 18  Disruption to it, intentional or 
otherwise (as seen in Lagos (2009), 19 Egypt (2013) 20 and Singapore (2016) 21), can have 
a major impact on essential services.  Internet hubs are also predominantly found 
within the littoral zone and are susceptible to influence from the sea.
The physical dimension
2.8. The sea covers over 70% of the globe’s surface ranging from the deep waters 
of the open oceans to the shallower littoral regions adjacent to the land.  Along with 
space and cyberspace, the oceans outside of state authority make up the global 
commons and no state may legitimately subject any part of the high seas to its 
sovereignty.22  Geographic, oceanographic and meteorological conditions vary and 
this results in large ranges in air and sea temperature, salinity and humidity.  The 
weather generated by these conditions make the sea a difficult environment in which 
to operate and affects the physical performance of individuals and equipment.  To 
survive and operate at sea it is imperative to understand fully the challenges of the 
physical environment.
18  Further detail is available at http://europe.newsweek.com/undersea-cables-transport-99-percent-
international-communications-319072?rm=eu
19  Further detail is available at http://allafrica.com/stories/200908250150.html
20  Further detail is available at https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/mar/28/egypt-undersea-
cable-arrests
21  Further detail is available at https://www.theregister.co.uk/2016/03/03/linode_says_several_cables_
serving_singapore_cut/
22  States may make continental shelf claims to 350 nautical miles, but the seabed of the high seas is 
administered by the International Seabed Authority.
Aircraft engineering technicians working off the coast of Scotland in force nine weather conditions

14
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
214
Maritime power in context
2.9. One of the more significant physical characteristics of the sea is the importance 
of maritime choke points, such as the Strait of Hormuz joining the Arabian Gulf 
to the Indian Ocean, or the Dover Straits between the UK and mainland Europe.23  
The graphic below demonstrates the way in which maritime choke points funnel 
international shipping and restrict the freedom of navigation.  This increases the 
risk of collision, piracy (particularly around the Horn of Africa off Somalia), but also 
influence from the land in ways that the opens seas are not.  These areas are of prime 
strategic importance to the global economy.
23 Other choke points include the Suez Canal, the Panama Canal and the straits of Skagerrak, Malacca, 
Gibraltar, Bosphorus, Bering, and Bab-el-Mandeb.
The Bab-el-Mandeb strait is an area of the Red Sea leading 
up to the Suez Canal where the distance between Yemen 
and Djibouti reduces to 20 miles.  It is one of the world’s 
busiest choke points.  From mid-2016 Houthi fighters in 
Yemen have engaged maritime forces in the strait, and on 
30 January 2017 attacked a Saudi Arabian warship with 
missiles and suicide boat attacks killing two sailors and 
wounding three others.
© Grolltech
Maritime choke points funnel international shipping and restrict freedom of navigation

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
15
2
Maritime power in context
The legal dimension
2.10.  The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) 24 is a 
broad-ranging legal framework which defines many of the rights and responsibilities 
of states in the use of the world’s oceans.  It establishes a framework for conducting 
maritime commerce, protecting the environment, managing marine natural resources 
and, critically, the entitlements of individual states in the various maritime areas 
described in Table 2.1.  
24  http://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf
Zone/area Description
Baseline
Except where otherwise provided in the United Nations Convention on  
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), the normal baseline for measuring the 
breadth of the territorial sea is the low-water line along the coast as marked 
on large-scale charts officially recognised by the coastal state.
Internal 
waters
Covers all of the waters on the landward side of the baseline.  The state is 
responsible for setting laws and governing their use.
Territorial 
seas/waters
From the baseline to 12 nautical miles.  The state is responsible for setting 
laws and governing their use, subject to the right of vessels from other 
states exercising the right of innocent, or in international straits, transit 
passage.
Contiguous 
zone
A zone that may not exceed 24 nautical miles in which a state can intervene 
to prevent potential offences which may otherwise occur inside territorial 
waters, or to apprehend a vessel that has committed an offence inside 
territorial waters and is attempting to escape.
Exclusive 
economic 
zone (EEZ)
This area extends up to 200 nautical miles from the baseline.  Within 
this area a state has sole claim over all natural resources.  This includes 
exploiting resources such as oil, gas and fishing.  Other states enjoy high 
seas freedoms in the EEZ, provided these activities do not impact on the 
coastal state’s rights and jurisdictions in the EEZ as set out in UNCLOS.
Continental 
shelf
The continental shelf of a coastal state comprises the seabed and subsoil 
of the submarine areas that extend beyond its territorial sea throughout 
the natural prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the 
continental margin, or to a distance of 200 nautical miles from the baseline.
High seas
The high seas are open to all states who may enjoy the freedom of the high 
seas subject only to the conditions described in UNCLOS/customary law.  
Vessels on the high seas are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of their flag 
states, with a few very important exceptions: for example, piracy is a crime 
of universal jurisdiction.
Table 2.1 – Sea zone descriptions

16
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
216
Maritime power in context
2 .11. The UNCLOS legal framework divided the sea into a number of zones measured 
from the baseline, normally the low water line along a nations coast, which set 
geographical limits in which state authority diminishes as the distance from the 
baseline increases.  Figure 2.2 highlights the principal zones.
Figure 2.2 – United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea zones
2.12. Freedom of navigation is the term given to the rights and freedoms that apply 
to all forms of transit on, over and under the high seas; it is vital to the security and 
economic stability of the UK.  It facilitates global maritime trade and provides the UK 
military with the legal landscape that allows it to respond to threats to security and 
pursue national interests at range from the UK.25  
2.13. Freedom of navigation operations provide an enduring strategic benefit 
to UK security by protecting the UK’s maritime rights and freedoms, encouraging 
lawful practice and preventing excessive geographical26 and/or jurisdictional27 claims 
gaining legal traction in international law.  UK maritime operations will themselves 
generate an audit trail of state practice.  Freedom of navigation operations influence 
other states’ governments and therefore constitute a form of naval diplomacy; they 
25 Her Majesty’s Government (HMG), The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security , May 2014, available at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-strategy-for-maritime-security
26 For example a territorial sea claim of more than 12 nautical miles.
27 For example an assertion that vessels must seek permission from, or notify the coastal state, before 
entering its territorial seas.
200 nm
exclusive economic zone
12 nm
territorial 
sea
contiguous 
zone
continental shelf
mainland high sea
deep seabedcontinental rise
continental 
slope
Note.  In some areas the continental shelf, slope or rise may 
extend beyond the 200 nautical mile (nm) exclusive economic zone.   
       
12 nm
baseline

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
17
2
Maritime power in context
may be symbolic or coercive.  Freedom of navigation operations in peacetime are one 
means by which maritime forces maintain the freedom of the seas for maritime trade, 
ensuring that the UNCLOS provisions are respected.  
The political dimension
2.14.  The modern political dimension of the maritime environment took shape 
largely during the 1970s.  Initially the extension of national sovereignty out to sea 
was often a political act that happened to have some economic consequences; more 
recently it is frequently undertaken for calculated economic benefit.  Many states, 
especially, but by no means exclusively, small island territories, struggle to police 
their maritime environments and to manage their maritime resources effectively.  
The extension of coastal state jurisdiction may increase the likelihood of disputes 
both between bordering states and also between coastal states and flag states 
exercising freedom of navigation; maritime power plays a vital role in resisting further 
restrictions on high seas freedoms.
2.15.  This political dimension also has a diplomatic element.  States and people have 
used the seas as a point of interaction for many centuries.  Bilateral and multilateral 
maritime engagements are still very much a routine element of international affairs 
with long-term benefits.  States use the freedom provided by the oceans as a 
conduit for building relationships, strengthening ties and providing assistance and 
reassurance to like-minded states.
The military dimension
2.16.  The seas have had a military dimension for well over 2,500 years.  This has 
been dominated by naval forces, of which there are now in excess of 150 worldwide, 
ranging from superpower navies at one end of the spectrum to small coastal policing 
forces at the other.  Even relatively minor maritime powers, or non-state actors, 
can pose a significant threat, especially in the context of restricting access through 
maritime choke points by using land-based missiles and capabilities such as sea 
mines, which are widely available and relatively cheap.
2 .17.  States or other actors may seek to exploit the sea to exert influence upon 
those they wish to persuade, deter and, if necessary, compel.  Equally, maritime 
forces can offer reassurance to allies through a military presence which may also 
be a useful lever to help prevent conflict.  Maritime forces can also provide support 
to humanitarian and disaster relief operations, which has the added benefit of 
building global political relationships and influence.  Many states are therefore opting 
to develop their maritime power, equipping themselves with modern warships 
and submarines and developing expeditionary capabilities, while also acquiring 
The seas have 
had a military 
dimension for  
well over 2,500 
years.
”
“

18
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
218
Maritime power in context
sophisticated land-based anti-access and area denial capabilities to deter other states’ 
maritime forces.  They are also seeking to exploit cyber and electromagnetic activities 
(CEMA) that can influence the maritime environment.
2.18. The NSS and SDSR 2015 painted a picture of a changed world, not a changing 
one.  These changes challenge the rules-based order that the UK seeks to uphold to 
safeguard our prosperity and security, providing an era of strategic state-on-state 
competition, but one dominated by sub-state conflict.28  Within this there are likely 
to be challenges for the maritime environment resulting from population growth, 
migration, greater demand for energy, climate change, continuing globalisation, 
rapid urbanisation and the exponential rate of change in some readily-available 
technologies.
2.19. In addition to the traditional factors, new developments such as the pervasive 
nature of information, the increasing importance of space, hybrid tactics and a 
potential network of combat-experienced terrorists, will influence the future in which 
maritime forces operate.  Within these, it is the pervasive nature of information that is 
potentially paramount.  When attempting to generate or project influence it is likely 
that the prevailing narrative and not necessarily the facts that will prove decisive in 
determining success or failure.  The ability to control and/or shape the information 
environment may prove pivotal in future operations.
Col S G Chekinov and Lt Gen S A Bogdanov (retired)29
2.20. In acknowledging the vital value of the sea to the UK and global economy, 
we must also recognise that this makes the sea an area worth fighting to control.30  
Therefore we must be able to push back against any potential challenge to the 
‘freedom of navigation’.  Only by doing so will we be able to deliver against the 
principal tasks of the continuous at sea deterrent and providing maritime security for 
our island nation, while remaining international and meeting these threats to the UK 
at distance from our shores.31 
 
28 Chief of the Defence Staff’s (CDS’) speech to Royal United Services Institute (RUSI), 14 December 2016.
29 Extract from ‘The Nature and Content of a New Generation War’ article in the Russian Journal of 
Military Theory and Strategy 2013.
30 Professor Andrew Lambert, The Future of Maritime Power.
31 CDS’ speech to RUSI, 14 December 2016.
‘Decisive battles in new-generation wars will rage in the information 
environment.’

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
19
2
Maritime power in context
The influence of the sea on the UK
2.21.  As an island nation the dimensions of the maritime environment impact the 
UK more acutely than our continental allies.  The UK’s history reflects that.  From the 
earliest days of recorded history, people and states have sought to be powerful at 
sea as they recognised that those who were able to exploit the environment enjoyed 
enormous advantages over those who did not.  The UK benefited significantly from 
this realisation, making us for a time the wealthiest and most powerful of all states.32  
Today the UK is well positioned to influence what happens within the maritime 
environment.  It benefits from London being a global hub for finance, commerce 
and law; being a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, the G8 
and G20 international forums and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO); and 
although leaving the European Union (EU), a key European state with close trade, 
defence and cultural links across the continent.  
32  Professor Geoffrey Till, Seapower: A Guide for the Twenty-First Century , 3rd Edition, 2013.
Section 2 – The national context
Royal Marines operating alongside Polish tanks taking part in NATO Exercise SABRE STRIKE

20
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
220
Maritime power in context
A maritime nation
2.22. Our Maritime Nation: Achievements and Challenges published by the 
Department of Transport in 2015 states that where maritime industries may have 
shaped our past they will also shape our future.  They remain an engine for growth, 
and are a vibrant, dynamic and indispensable element of our economy.  While other 
factors will also shape our national future, it should not be overlooked that globally 
80% of trade by volume transits by sea, and for the UK this figure rises to in excess of 
95%; almost everything that we import comes by sea.33 
2.23. A study commissioned by the Department of Transport in 2015 predicts 
the doubling of global sea trade by 2030.  Current estimates suggest that the 
direct contribution to the UK economy from the maritime sector, including marine 
industries, was at least £1 1 billion in 2012.34 
2.24. In appreciating the role of the maritime sector the NSS and SDSR 2015 
announced that the Government would publish a new national ship building 
strategy35 to lay the foundations for a modern and efficient sector capable of 
meeting the country’s future defence and security needs.  An independent report 
commissioned to inform the strategy made a number of recommendations to 
improve the way in which the MOD procures and designs warships, and exploit the 
‘renaissance in shipbuilding’ in UK regional shipyards.
The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security
2.25. The UK Government recognises the role that the sea plays in supporting the 
country’s security and prosperity.  The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security 2014 
highlights that the maritime environment is a complicated international system in 
which the UK, as a leading player, uses diplomatic, military and law enforcement 
levers to drive international cooperation and build capacity.  To manage a security 
environment which incorporates numerous overlapping interests, both domestically 
and internationally, the UK has adopted two key principles – integration and 
collaboration.  These principles bring together the full range of instruments of 
government, driving cooperation and efficiency and emphasising that maritime 
power is not the sole preserve of navies.
33 HMG, The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security , May 2014.
34 This is a similar order of magnitude to other important high-value industries like the manufacture 
of pharmaceutical products (£13.3 billion gross value added (GVA) in 2013), the aerospace industry (£6.8 
billion GVA in 2013) and the road freight industry (£9.4 billion GVA in 2013).  Department of Transport, 
Maritime Growth Study: keeping the UK competitive in a global market, 2015, available at https://www.gov.
uk/government/publications/maritime-growth-study-report
35 MOD, National Shipbuilding Strategy: The Future of Naval Shipbuilding in the UK , 2017, available at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-shipbuilding-strategy
...almost 
everything that 
we [UK] import 
comes by sea.
”
“

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
21
2
Maritime power in context
National security objectives
2.26.  The NSS and SDSR 2015 provides a national vision of a ‘secure and prosperous 
United Kingdom, with global reach and influence’, with three national security 
objectives that emphasise the enduring requirement to protect our people and our 
economy. 
a. National Security Objective 1 is to protect our people – at home, in 
our Overseas Territories and abroad, and to protect our territory, economic 
security, infrastructure and way of life.
b.  National Security Objective 2 is to project our global influence – reducing 
the likelihood of threats materialising and affecting the UK, our interests, and 
those of our allies and partners.
c. National Security Objective 3 is to promote our prosperity – seizing 
opportunities, harnessing innovation to strengthen our national security, 
and working with industry to ensure we have the capabilities and equipment 
that we need.  Our economic and national security go hand-in-hand.  Our 
strong economy 
provides more 
opportunities 
at home and 
overseas for us 
to increase our 
prosperity.  A 
growing global 
economy helps 
to reduce 
poverty and 
build security 
for all.
‘We are man-marking these vessels every step of the way around 
the UK as part of our steadfast commitment to keep Britain safe.’
Defence Secretary Sir Michael Fallon
HMS St Albans and Typhoon jets escorting the Russian Aircraft Carrier Admiral 
Kuznetsov and the nuclear-powered guided missile cruiser Petr Velikiy

22
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
222
Maritime power in context
2 . 27. The core roles of UK maritime forces – war fighting, maritime security and 
Defence Engagement – contribute to the National Security Objectives.  In doing so 
maritime forces operate close to the UK to uphold the integrity of our territorial waters 
and protect national trade, project globally to support the UK Overseas Territories and, 
in cooperation with other like minded nations, promote the free movement of global 
trade.  Concurrently, UK maritime forces support the ‘international by design’ approach 
and play a leading role in generating influence and combat power; which contributes 
to effective conflict prevention through diplomacy and deterrence.
International by design
2.28. The UK has worldwide interests and responsibilities; including responsibility for 
the security of 14 Overseas Territories (12 of which are islands),36 with over five million 
UK nationals living overseas.37  To support the integration and collaboration agenda set 
out by The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security, the military instrument of national 
power intends to be ‘international by design’.  This theme strengthens the international 
dimension of UK Defence policy and planning as a way of enabling Defence to deliver 
against each of the National Security Objectives set out above.  Our international 
approach aims to deliver against these outcomes through developing strong strategic 
relationships; bilateral and multilateral, which in turn are based on the pillars of 
Defence Engagement, combined formations and capability collaboration, all of which 
is underpinned by a persistently engaged global Defence network.  The tempo and 
pattern of maritime deployments is a key enabler to this intent.
36 Anguilla; Bermuda; British Antarctic Territory; British Indian Ocean Territory; British Virgin Islands; 
Cayman Islands;Falkland Islands; Gibraltar; Montserrat; Pitcairn Islands; Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan 
da Cunha; South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands; Sovereign Base areas of Cyprus; and Turks and Caicos 
Islands; along with the UK and dependencies, have a combined exclusive economic zone of over 2.5 million 
square miles, the fifth largest in the world.
37 HMG, The UK National Strategy for Maritime Security , May 2014.
HMS Ocean with allied and partner forces during Exercise BALTOPS in 2015

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
23
2
‘We will protect our people, territories, values and interests, at home and overseas, 
through strong armed forces and in partnership with allies, to ensure our security  
and safeguard our prosperity.’
Maritime power in context
2.29.  We cannot address all risks on our own.  It is essential that where practicable 
our UK Armed Forces train and exercise to operate alongside allies and partners, 
keeping NATO at the very heart of UK Defence. 38
Maritime support to the Defence Tasks
Defence Strategic Direction 2016
2.30.  The Defence Strategic Direction 2016 defined the above vision for Defence 
policy.  To deliver this the Ministry of Defence has taken the key themes from the 
SDSR and distilled them into eight Defence Tasks that support the National Security 
Objectives.  The UK’s maritime forces contribute directly to all eight of the Defence 
Tasks, and are inherently ‘international by design’.  The Defence Tasks are listed below 
in Table 2.2 with an indication of which national security objective they fall under.  
Defence Task 1 Defence, Security and Resilience of the Homeland and Overseas 
Territories (National Security Objective (NSO) 1)
Defence Task 2 Nuclear Deterrence and the Defence Nuclear Enterprise (NSO 1)
Defence Task 3 Understanding (NSO 2)
Defence Task 4 Influence through International Defence Engagement (NSO 2)
Defence Task 5 Overseas Defence Activity (NSO 1)
Defence Task 6 UK Prosperity and Civil Society (NSO 3)
Defence Task 7 Direct Defence
Defence Task 8 Strategic Base and Enabling Functions
Table 2.2 – The Defence Tasks
38  Defence Strategic Direction 2016.

24
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
224
Maritime power in context
2.31. The Naval Service force elements constitute the principal components of UK 
maritime forces.  These are apportioned to the Defence Tasks in the Naval Plan, a 
classified document.  However, the breadth of activity conducted by maritime forces 
at distance from the UK means that virtually all ships at sea on either task group 
operations or operating indepe
ndently are contributing to a Defence Task, or multiple 
tasks, concurrently.  In particular, maritime forces play a unique and pivotal role in the 
fir
st two.
Deterrence
2.32. At the heart of the UK’s defence posture is the principle of deterrence; its 
purpose is to dissuade a potential opponent from adopting a course of action that 
threatens national interests.  Deterrence is
 a simple idea arising from enduring 
facts about human behaviour: that in decision-making, all people take account 
of the probable consequences of their actions.  It can be based on denial or 
punishment.  It may be broadly preventative or immediately focused to address 
specific threats.  Within the UK’s maritime forces there are two modes of deterrence; 
n
uclear (supporting Defence Task 2) and conventional (supporting Defence Task 1).  
Underpinned by understanding, the effect of deterrence depends on four areas, the:
• c
apability of the system;
• c
redibility of the intent to use it;
• c
ommunication of these to any potential aggressors; and
• c
omprehension of the effect of deterrence on our adversaries.
Nuclear deterrence
2.33. T he maintenance and operation of the UK’s minimum credible independent 
nuclear deterrent is Defence’s priority task.  To be credible, a deterrent must be able 
to function regardless of any pre-emptive action.  For the UK the nuclear deterrent is 
delivered by the submarine enabled continuous at sea deterrent (CASD), known as 
Operation RELENTLESS.
Conventional deterrence
2.34. C onventional deterrence has a number of elements.  Jointly, the non-nuclear 
components of the UK’s maritime, land and air forces, provide the collective capability 
that underpins conventional deterrence.  It is based upon the potential and the 
actual use of hard power.  Here the attribute of poise means that maritime forces are 
particularly well-suited to creating a conventional deterrent effect at distance from 
the UK.  Maritime forces play a key deterrent role in maintaining the security of UK 
territorial waters and those of the Overseas Territories. 
The 
maintenance 
and operation 
of the UK’s 
minimum 
credible 
independent 
nuclear 
deterrent 
is Defence’s 
priority task. 
”
“

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
25
2
Maritime power in context
 
Key points  
• The National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 
recognises that the UK sits at the heart of the global rules-based international order 
that has provided stability to the world’s political and economic landscape since 
the end of World War II.
• Stategically there are five dimensions to the maritime environment.
a.  Economic.  Uncontested access to a safe and secure maritime environment is a 
principal requirement for all the world’s trading nations.
b. Physical.  The sea provides access to almost all parts of the earth’s surface and 
outside of legal jurisdiction is called the global commons.  
c. Legal.  The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) defines 
many of the rights and responsibilities of states in the use of the world’s oceans.
d. Political.  Bilateral and multilateral cooperation at sea are still very much a 
routine element of international affairs with long-term benefits. 
e. Military.  While the character of conflict is changing, the developing nations of 
the world are increasing their maritime strength due to the vital value of the sea to 
national and the global economy.  This makes the ability to exert sea control, secure 
freedom of navigation or simply to influence events in the maritime an important 
aspect of a countries military.
• Our future prosperity depends on our continued ability to safeguard national and 
global trade; most of which moves by sea.
• The UK’s maritime forces contribute directly to all eight of the Defence Tasks and 
the three National Security Objectives.
• UK maritime forces train and operate alongside numerous allies and partners, and 
keep NATO at the very heart of UK Defence. 
• Deterrence is at the heart of the UK’s defence posture and maintenance of the 
continuous at sea deterrent (CASD) is the defence priority and predominately 
delivered by the Naval Service.:

[Page 38: No extractable text]

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
27
JDP X-XX (X Edition)
The foundations of 
maritime power
Chapter 3 builds on the military dimension of maritime 
power.  Initially presenting the aspects of fighting power, 
it then introduces the inherent attributes, or capabilities, 
of maritime forces, while also highlighting some of the 
limitations of operating in the maritime environment.  
Finally, Chapter 3 describes the principles that underpin the 
way maritime forces operate to project national maritime 
power.
Chapter 3
3
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
Section 1 – Fighting power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Section 2 – The attributes of maritime forces  . . . . 36
Section 3 – Adaptability of maritime forces . . . . . . 40
Section 4 – Principles and applications of  
                       maritime power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

28
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
328
“
”
Almost every aspect of our national 
life depends on our connections to 
the wider world, and most of these 
connections are provided by the sea.
 
The UK National Strategy for  
Maritime Security 
The foundations of maritime power

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
29
3
The foundations of maritime power
Chapter 3 – The 
foundations of maritime 
power
3.1.  Fighting power is at the core of every military Service as it defines the ability to 
conduct successful operations. 39  It is not simply a calculation of the number of people 
and equipment, it is also the ability to maximise the potential of such equipment 
and the ability to motivate people to fight.  While these aspects are common across 
all environments, the different attributes and roles of maritime power offer a unique 
contribution to military power and therefore a unique perspective on fighting power.
3.2.  Applying fighting power must be considered in context.  It should take  
account of:
• the character of the situation;
• the physical environment;
• the opponent;
• allies, partners and other agencies; and
• culture and history.
3.3.  Fighting power is made up of three interrelated components outlined at  
Figure 3.1.  They are:
• conceptual component  – the thought processes providing the intellectual  
basis and theoretical justification for providing and employing our Armed 
Forces;
• moral component  – the ability to get people to fight, individually and 
collectively; and
• physical component – the means to fight – balanced, agile forces at readiness, 
with war fighting at their core.
39  Further detail can be found in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 5th Edition .
Section 1 – Fighting power

30
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
330
‘Ideas matter, sometimes fundamentally.’
The foundations of maritime power
Figure 3.1 – The components of fighting power
3.4. The single-Service Chiefs of Staff are responsible, through the Chief of the 
Defence Staff, for delivering fighting power to the Secretary of State.  While the 
Royal Navy will deliver the greater part of UK maritime power, the British Army, the 
Royal Air Force and Joint Forces Command have to ensure that elements of their own 
forces can operate effectively in the maritime environment as part of a joint force, 
just as maritime forces have to be able to operate in the air and land environments.  
This requires dedicated joint training along with common education to generate 
understanding and effectiveness.
The conceptual component
General J Mattis, United States Marine Corps
3.5. The elements of the conceptual component are: the principles of war;40 
doctrine; and conceptual innovation.  Together these provide an intellectual 
framework within which maritime military personnel can develop an understanding 
about the specifics of both their profession and the activities they may have to 
undertake.  The conceptual component reflects accumulated experience, ideas for 
improvements to existing practice and analysis of the future security environment.  
This provides commanders with the ability to understand the context within which 
they operate and serves as the foundation upon which creativity, ingenuity and 
initiative may be exercised in complex situations.
40 The UK principles of war are: selection and maintenance of the aim; maintenance of morale; 
offensive action; security; surprise; concentration of force; economy of effort; flexibility; cooperation; and 
sustainability.
•  Manpower
•  Equipment
•  Collective performance
•  Sustainability
•  Readiness
Physical component
•  Moral cohesion
•  Motivation
•  Leadership
Moral component
•  Principles of war
•  Doctrine
•  Conceptual innovation
Conceptual component

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
31
3
The foundations of maritime power
3.6.  To assist commanders in planning and executing operations the maritime forces 
use three core functions to support this aspect of the conceptual component. 41 
a. Understand.   A detailed understanding of the problem and the situation is 
required to enable effective decision-making.
b.  Fight.  Fight is used to describe those effects, offensive and defensive, hard 
and soft, that relate to action against an enemy or adversary.
(1) Shape  – manipulating the operational environment for own 
advantage, and to disadvantage the enemy.
(2) Engage  – the decisive element of an operation will usually involve 
some form of offensive action against the will and cohesion of the enemy.
(3) Exploit – seize and retain the initiative.  Using manoeuvre and 
offensive action is fundamental to seizing and holding the initiative.
(4) Protect  – a comprehensive and coordinated approach to force 
protection is required and must allow maintenance of the operational 
narrative.
c. Sustain.   Freedom of action is underpinned by sustainment.
 
41  Royal Navy’s Book of Reference (digital) 4487, Volume 3.2, Conduct of Maritime Operations.
Royal Marines operating in extreme environments present  
a significant logistic sustainability challenge

32
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
332
‘The enduring spirit derived from our people’s loyalty to their ship, unit or team 
sustained by high professional standards and strong leadership, that gives us courage 
in adversity and the determination to fight and win.’
The foundations of maritime power
The moral component
3.7. It is fundamental to operational effectiveness that the components of the 
moral component are understood, upheld and passed on, since once they have been 
lost they are difficult to recover.  As the principal UK military actor in the maritime 
environment the Naval Service core values encapsulate the moral component.  These 
are represented in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2 – Naval Service core values
3.8. Ethos is also a key aspect of the moral component.  Ethos is the distinctive 
character, spirit and attitudes of a community, people, culture or group; it defines 
and motivates the shared ideas, understandings and customs.  It is of fundamental 
importance to continued success in future operations and armed conflict. 
Royal Navy ethos
Commitment
DisciplineRespect for 
others
CourageIntegrity

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
33
3
Admiral A B Cunningham – evacuation of Crete 1941
The rapid German advance through Greece required an exhausted Royal Navy to 
evacuate 50,000 troops from the next target, Crete.  Badly organised and short of heavy 
equipment, the land forces and limited air forces were ill-prepared for the German 
invasion of Crete, which began on 20 May 1941.  Five days later the battle for the island 
was lost.  Forced to withdraw his two damaged aircraft carriers (HMS Formidable and 
HMS Illustrious), Admiral Cunningham began the evacuation without any form of air 
cover.  Most of the troops 
were taken off a shallow 
beach on the south coast by 
worn-out destroyers with 
fragile crews.  Suffering 
heavy losses on the passage 
to Egypt, the Admiralty 
questioned the wisdom 
of carrying on without air 
cover (Crete cost the Royal 
Navy 1,828 casualties and 
significant damage and loss of equipment including three cruisers and six destroyers).  
Despite the serious losses, Admiral Cunningham refused to give up insisting that the 
Navy return one more night – ‘the Navy had never yet failed the Army in such a situation, 
and was not going to do so now’.  As he told his staff when they advised him to call off 
the operation, ‘you can build a new ship in three years but you can’t rebuild a reputation 
in under 300 years’.
The foundations of maritime power
Leadership
3.9.  Military leadership is characterised by projecting personality and purpose to 
influence subordinates to do what is required of them and to engender within them 
the confidence that breeds initiative and the acceptance of risk and responsibility.  
Leadership starts with self-discipline.  It is a continuous process throughout training 
and daily life.  Leaders promote this amongst their subordinates through: decisive 
action; clear direction and guidance; rules and example; advice, encouragement and 
discipline; and by giving subordinates every opportunity to contribute to mission 
success by delegating responsibility sensibly.
3.10.  The commanding officer, be that of a ship, a submarine, a commando, a Fleet 
Air Arm unit or higher headquarters, sets the benchmark.  They are responsible for 
inspiring their people to do their job to the best of their ability during peace, through 
adversity and in war.

34
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
334
Leadership – Chief Petty Officer Jonathan ‘Buck’ Rogers
Jonathan ‘Buck’ Rogers enlisted in the Royal Navy in 1938, later being awarded the 
Distinguished Service Medal for his ‘coolness and leadership’ under enemy fire during 
an action off Dunkirk in 1944.  At the end of the war he was discharged from the Royal 
Navy and in 1950 he applied to join the Royal Australian Navy.  In 1963 Chief Petty Officer 
Rogers was embarked as the senior sailor on board the destroyer Voyager where he was 
responsible for the ‘good order and discipline’ of the ship’s company.  On 10 February 
1964 Voyager took part in exercises with the aircraft carrier Melbourne off the south 
coast of New South Wales.  That evening Voyager collided with Melbourne and was cut 
in two.  Voyager’s severed forward section immediately heeled sharply to starboard, 
turning upside down in minutes and sinking within five minutes.  Rogers was one of the 
82 men who died.  Sailors who escaped later told how Rogers had taken charge of the 
situation.  He had calmed terrified shipmates, attempted to control the flooding, tried to 
free a jammed escape hatch, and organised men to move into other compartments with 
functioning emergency exits.  When it was obvious that some of his comrades would 
not get out in time, he led them in prayer and a hymn, ‘encouraging them to meet death’ 
beside him ‘with dignity and honour’.  His wife remarked, ‘It was typical of him – he never 
thought of himself’.  He was posthumously awarded the George Cross.
The foundations of maritime power
The physical component
3.11. The physical component of fighting power provides the means to fight. 
Broadly this consists of manpower, training, collective performance, equipment and 
sustainability, at readiness including effective deployment and recovery. 
3.12. Readiness, deployability and recovery.  Fighting power can only be effective 
if it is applied at the right time and at the right place.  In this regard maritime forces 
are unique as they are able to deploy independently, provide a persistent forward 
presence and then self-recover to the UK on completion of an operation.  Within 
the UK they are brought to a material state to be safe to, and capable of, deploying, 
with suitable material enhancements as required.  In addition the collective training 
provided by the Flag Officer Sea Training organisation ensures ships of the Royal Navy 
(and many foreign navies that the UK helps to train) deploy at readiness.  In practice 
this means that maritime forces are able to move from peacetime operations to a 
state of war in a matter of hours.
3.13. Sustainability.  Sustainability enables ships, submarines, aviation and 
commando units to deploy to an area of operations, remaining fully mission capable 
for a variety of roles.  This provides the commander with the flexibility to remain 
on task and operationally capable for as long as necessary.  Sustainability depends 

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
35
3
The foundations of maritime power
upon the provision of a variety of logistic functions and is a complex, dynamic and 
wide ranging series of disciplines which, on a task group scale, often dictates the 
operational tempo.  Logistics encompasses the delivery of organic medical functions, 
the supply chain and a considerable portion of engineering output.  Together these 
are equal partners in the maintenance of task group or single ship sustainability.  
Sustainability is defined as: the ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of 
combat power for the duration required to achieve its objectives. 42  Sustainability is:
• one of the ten principles of war;
• the responsibility of commanders at every level of command;
• an integral part of the planning, preparing and executing of, and 
withdrawal and recovery from, every operation; and
• must be fully exercised in peacetime to be effective in war.
3.14.  Deployed maritime forces.  
Deployed maritime forces aim to be 
as self-sufficient as possible.  Maritime 
first line sustainability is provided by 
the units’ on-board stocks,43 including 
food, the ability to make potable water 
and engineering spares.44  Second 
line support, particularly for fuel, is 
provided by the support shipping 
of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA).45  
If external support is required it is 
provided through the Defence Support 
Network, which could include host-
nation support, potentially through 
a deployed forward logistic site; or 
resupply from the UK strategic base.  
This logistic capability provides the 
UK with ‘blue water’46 maritime forces 
which are able to operate at distance 
from the UK.
42  NATOTerm.
43  On-board stocks are referred to as classes of supply.  These are: Class 1 – provisions (including 
potable water); Class 2 – scaled stores items (principally this includes marine engineering spares, weapon 
engineering supplies); Class 3 – petrols, oils and lubricants; Class 4 – non-scaled items; Class 5 – munitions.
44  Where stocks are not routinely held on-board (for example, to support an aviation asset) a deployable 
spare pack is embarked.
45  Reciprocal agreements exist where maritime forces share logistic support shipping capabilities.
46  In this context ‘blue water’ refers to maritime forces able to operate on the open oceans or high seas.  
Green and brown water refers to maritime forces that are limited in their operations to a state’s coastal 
waters, ports and harbours, and inland rivers and estuaries, respectively.
Replenishment at sea

36
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
336
The foundations of maritime power
3.15. Every military force has distinctive attributes brought about by the 
characteristics of the environment in which it operates.  It is these attributes that 
provide the foundations for the military power that assists political  
decision-makers in supporting national objectives.
3.16. In this fifth edition of Joint Doctrine 
Publication (JDP) 0-10, UK Maritime Power 
the range of attributes has been refined.  In 
addition, as the purpose of maritime power 
is to exert national influence, the purpose 
of each attribute is to generate influence.47 
3.17. Influence is defined as: the capacity to have an effect on the character or 
behaviour of someone or something, or the effect itself. 48   The ability to influence is 
intrinsically related to the ability to project military power.  Therefore the shape and 
nature of a maritime force should be carefully considered before deploying from the 
UK.  Figure 3.3 highlights the attributes of maritime forces. 
Figure 3.3 – The attributes of maritime forces
47 Previously the summation of the attributes had been designated as ‘leverage’.
48 Concise Oxford English Dictionary , 12th Edition, 2011.
Access
MobilityPersistence
PoiseVersatillity
In/f_luence
Section 2 – The attributes of maritime forces
‘The ... greatest value [of the Navy] 
will be found in events that fail to 
occur because of its influence.’
Professor Colin Gray

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
37
3
The foundations of maritime power
Section 2 – The attributes of maritime forces
Access
3.18.  The long-standing principle of freedom of navigation in international waters 
allows maritime forces to access areas of national interest and potential threat.  This 
access guarantees freedom of navigation for maritime forces up to 12 nautical miles 
from a coastline to allow options for intervention at a time and place of national 
choosing.  This enables forces to poise in or near areas of interest, covertly or overtly 
as circumstances require.  By having an expeditionary stance and a forward presence, 
maritime forces are often closest to crises as they develop and are able to respond 
accordingly.  While adversaries may use anti-access and area denial methods such 
as mines and shore-based missiles, alternative approaches such as cyber and 
electromagnetic activities (CEMA) can be used to attack navigation systems or 
exploit cognitive methods such as social media messaging in an attempt to restrict 
or deny access.  Maritime forces can use their mobility and freedom of navigation to 
attempt to counter these activities, but these threats will require consideration when 
generating a maritime force. 
Poise
3.19.  Poise is the ability of maritime forces to loiter in international waters 
demonstrating a forward military presence at readiness without the political and 
military complications and risks of deploying forces ashore or projecting from a  
third-party location.  The forward presence of credible maritime forces also 
demonstrates commitment to allies without requiring a military footprint ashore.  
Maritime forces poised in this manner have great utility in deterring or resolving 
potential or emerging conflict. 49
Mobility
3.20.  Exploiting the access and freedom of navigation afforded by the sea, provides 
maritime forces with a high degree of mobility.  These rights facilitate maritime 
manoeuvre and provide a deployable force that can reposition quickly or cover 
49  Gerson M and Whiteneck D, Deterrence and Influence: The Navy’s Role in Preventing War , CRM D0019315.
A4/1Rev, March 2009.
‘The fact that naval forces can ‘loiter’ and be minimally intrusive is an important and 
unique contribution to deterrence.  The Army can loiter, but it cannot be minimally 
intrusive; the Air Force can be minimally intrusive (although, because it still needs some 
land-based infrastructure, it is more intrusive than maritime forces), but it cannot loiter.  
Only naval forces can do both simultaneously.’49

38
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
338
The foundations of maritime power
significant distances to respond to situations.  While shipping lacks the speed of 
aircraft, unless maritime-based aircraft are available to respond, maritime platforms 
are continuously mobile while having the ability to carry significantly more payload.  
This provides huge flexibility at both the tactical and operational levels.  Sealift, either 
through Defence-owned shipping or hired commercial shipping is the most  
cost-effective means and only real practicable method of deploying at scale to even 
land locked countries.
Persistence 
3.21. Maritime forces are able to offer a unique persistence providing the UK with 
a sovereign capability that can be established with minimal political and logistic 
commitment and easily withdrawn.  The endurance provided by on-board stocks, the 
ability to replenish at sea and operate at range from host-nation support provides 
a sustained presence unlike that provided by any other military force.  However, 
persistence is tempered by the nature of the environment, the range of engineering 
spares held on-board and the inability to replenish some weapon systems while 
at sea.  The sea is unforgiving and takes its toll on people as well as equipment.  In 
addition the weather can also be a challenge to maritime operations, although 
maritime forces can use their mobility to counteract this.  While persistence is 
achievable, if maritime operations are being conducted at significant range from 
the UK or another supporting base, operations can be constrained or limited in their 
duration.
HMS Defender with the French aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle supporting operations against Daesh

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
39
3
Versatility – Operation VERITAS
From 2001 to 2002 HMS Illustrious was deployed on the large UK and Omani exercise, Saif 
Sareea II.  During the exercise, the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Centre took place.  
HMS Illustrious remained in theatre while other elements of the task force returned to 
the UK.  Overnight and while still at sea HMS Illustrious converted from the carrier strike 
to the commando role.  HMS Illustrious had elements of the special forces and Royal 
Marines on board, ready for possible combat operations in Afghanistan.  In November 
2001 a Special Boat Service unit and then Royal Marines were lifted by helicopter 
from HMS Illustrious to capture Bagram air base and pave the way for deploying the 
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).  In addition, Special Air Services troops 
operated with Chinooks from the carrier.  This capability played an important part in the 
UK’s effort in the fighting in Afghanistan as it provided the ability to get a small number 
of high-quality forces on the ground at a really early stage which played a hugely 
significant part in the fall of Kabul.   
”
“Maritime forces are uniquely versatile , easily changing their 
military posture, while undertaking several tasks concurrently 
and remaining available for rapid re-tasking .
The foundations of maritime power
Versatility
3.22.  Maritime forces are uniquely versatile, easily changing their military posture, 
while undertaking several tasks concurrently and remaining available for rapid  
re-tasking.  Deploying with inherently high levels of readiness, a warship can 
transition from a peacetime state to a combat ready one in a matter of hours.  This 
capability offers opportunities to coordinate maritime activity with diplomacy and 
supports the ‘international by design’ approach.  Designed and trained to operate 
in a multinational context, UK maritime forces are capable of being deployed 
independently, with a partner nation under a bilateral agreement, or as a part of 
a wider coalition, such as North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO), in pursuit of 
common goals.

40
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
340
The foundations of maritime power
3.23. Although all maritime forces can take advantage of the five inherent attributes 
it does not follow that they will succeed on operations.  To achieve the necessary 
influence required to fulfil national objectives it is highly likely that maritime power 
will need to be adjusted to the prevailing context within which it is employed.  
The adaptability of maritime forces is the pre-eminent quality which ensures that 
maritime power remains relevant in new and changing situations.
3.24. While maritime forces are inherently versatile, they require adaptability to be 
able to learn quickly and alter plans to respond to changing situations.  The character 
of future conflict cannot be predicted accurately, so a maritime force must prepare for 
the most complex and demanding operations but also maintain the agility to adapt 
rapidly to specific operational requirements.  Adaptable maritime forces are able to 
recognise and understand new challenges, experiment with solutions and implement 
effective responses at a higher tempo than the enemy.  This allows them to seize 
and maintain the initiative and exploit opportunities.  Our command philosophy 
of mission command embraces decentralised execution, providing the freedom of 
action to adapt to circumstances within the commander’s intent.  Adaptability is 
further enabled by investment in developing experience, education, training and 
equipment.
Section 3 – Adaptability of maritime forces
A United States Marine Corps V-22 Osprey operates from HMS Illustrious during Operation PATWIN

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
41
3
Adapting for disaster relief operations – Operation PATWIN 
In the autumn of 2013 Typhoon Haiyan struck the Philippines causing widespread damage.  
Almost 300 miles wide it was one of the most intense tropical storms to ever make landfall 
and it ripped through the south east of the country killing, injuring and leaving thousands of 
people homeless.  
As part of the joint UK response – Operation PATWIN, HMS Daring was detached from an 
air defence exercise with the Australian, New Zealand, Singaporean and Malaysian navies, 
and was on station within five days.  Prior to deploying HMS Daring’s ships company had 
undertaken intensive disaster relief training meaning that the ships company were able to 
adapt from an air defence posture overnight.  When on station HMS Daring spent ten days 
providing support to some 10,000 people in isolated and devastated areas on remote islands 
around the Visayan Sea.  Concurrently HMS Illustrious was in Oman on the return leg of the 
Exercise COUGAR 13.  Operating in the landing platform helicopter (LPH) role Illustrious 
was detached from the task group and dashed 6,000 miles from the Horn of Africa to the 
Philippines via Singapore.  In Singapore, HMS Illustrious offloaded equipment embarked for 
the Exercise COUGAR deployment and working closely with a team of logistics experts from 
the Department for International Development (DFID) loaded over 500 tonnes of disaster 
relief stores.  In addition further Royal Marines, medical teams, personnel from 24 Commando 
Royal Engineers and additional carrier air group personnel were all embarked.  
Upon arrival in the Philippines the carrier relieved HMS Daring and spent three weeks 
providing humanitarian assistance as part of the international effort.  Like HMS Daring, HMS 
Illustrious’ ships company had undertaken disaster relief training at the Flag Officer Sea 
Training organisation and were therefore able to adapt quickly to the requirements of the 
mission.  In addition to HMS Illustrious’s seven helicopters, a United States Marine Corps V-22 
Osprey was embarked.  The ship was able to access remote areas quickly and the sea-based 
helicopters were able to survey large areas and then deliver aid that simply could not be 
accessed by any other means. 
An estimated 50,000 people were helped by the efforts of the men and women of HMS 
Daring and HMS Illustrious in the Philippines.  Vital infrastructure was repaired and shelters 
erected to help the large number of people whose homes had been destroyed.  In addition 
over 300 tonnes of food and aid, 16,000 litres of water were delivered by the two warships.  
The embarked helicopters flew 431 hours of relief missions, with their effect maximised by 
the proximity of the ship.
While Operation PATWIN demonstrates the inherent versatility, mobility, access and 
persistence of maritime forces it also demonstrates the adaptability of the personnel.  The 
investment in disaster relief training prior to deployment enhanced the forces’ ability to 
adapt to the prevailing conditions and successfully achieve the mission.
The foundations of maritime power
Section 3 – Adaptability of maritime forces

42
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
342
The level of 
sea control 
required, 
and indeed 
achievable, will 
depend upon 
the threat and 
the mission. 
”
“
The foundations of maritime power
3.25. The strategic use of maritime power is made possible through the concept of 
sea control and underpinned by the principles of maritime manoeuvre and maritime 
power projection.  These are supported by a number of operational approaches.
Sea control
3.26. Previously the total control of the sea was referred to as command of the sea.   
In the modern context the worldwide growth in navies has tempered ‘command of the 
sea’ to the concept of ‘sea control’, where a maritime force establishes the conditions 
to allow freedom of action in a particular part of the sea, at a particular time, to the 
required degree and, if necessary, deny its use to an opponent.  Sea control requires 
control of the surface and subsurface environments (including the seabed), the air 
above the area in which sea control is required,50 the electromagnetic environment 
and potentially areas of the land where that part of the land dominates the sea. 
3. 27. The level of sea control required, and indeed achievable, will depend upon the 
threat and the mission.  Where sea control is not contested the force has achieved 
it by default and can focus on delivering maritime manoeuvre or maritime power 
projection.  If there is any risk to freedom of action, sea control is necessary; however, 
if the risk is small, the capabilities required can be correspondingly modest.  Gaining 
the necessary level of sea control early, and retaining it, will be a major component 
of any maritime or expeditionary operation.  In addition control of the air above 
the sea, across the shoreline and some distance inshore may also be a fundamental 
requirement.  This will need to be achieved by a combination of sea-based, land-based 
and CEMA capabilities. 
3.28. Where sea control is necessary it can be achieved through one of a number of 
operational approaches.
a. Decisive battle.  While a successful decisive battle at sea, where maritime 
forces classically oppose each other is exceedingly rare in the modern era, 
a decisive engagement is not.  A singular act can provide sea control.  What 
is more common is a process of cumulative attrition or the concentration of 
military effect at a singular point rather than the concentration of maritime 
assets.
50  Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.3.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Air Maritime Coordination , Edition A, 
Version 1, page 3.4.
Section 4 – Principles and applications of  
maritime power

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
43
3
Fleet-in-being – German Navy, 1941
After the sinking of the Bismarck in May 1941, the German Navy was wary of the threat 
posed by the combination of Royal Navy battleships and carriers.  Seeking to preserve 
its capital ships, it stationed them in Norwegian fjords.  From here, they represented a 
potential threat to convoys to Russia, as well as to Atlantic shipping if they could break 
out, and therefore tied down several British capital ships for an extended period.  While 
this represented something of a success for a fleet-in-being approach, they might have 
achieved more if they had been used in a more positive and active way, in combination 
with other units of the German Navy and Air Force: fleet-in-being has potential but risks 
becoming passive.
The foundations of maritime power
b.  Sea denial.   Sea denial is a form of anti-access and area denial exercised 
when one party prevents an adversary from controlling a maritime area 
without being able to control that area oneself.  It can be a tool for a superior 
maritime force, either in a secondary area of operations, or for one phase of 
a larger campaign.  Classic means of achieving sea denial include laying a 
minefield or deploying submarines to threaten enemy surface forces.  A more 
recent method, particularly appropriate in littoral operations, is to project land 
assets such as surface-to-surface missile batteries along the coast to pose an 
unacceptable level of risk to maritime units.  In addition, non-lethal effects 
such as control of the electromagnetic environment and other passive means 
can be used to support sea denial activities.
c. Fleet-in-being.   A state deprived of maritime superiority might choose, or 
be forced, to adopt a strategy of fleet-in-being.  By avoiding confrontation with 
a superior enemy a state can hold back its own maritime forces but continue 
to threaten those of the enemy or their ability to carry out their mission.  The 
submarine provides an excellent contemporary example of a fleet-in-being, as 
it could be held covertly in reserve but could also be operating undetected in 
an area vital to the superior force.  
Decisive battle – Falklands War, 1982
The Argentine Navy was strong enough to pose a serious threat to the British task force 
during the Falklands War, even seeking to launch a two-pronged attack against it on  
1 May.  The following day, however, the nuclear submarine HMS Conqueror torpedoed 
and sank the cruiser General Belgrano.  While the British still faced submarine and air 
threats, as a result of this single engagement, the Argentine surface fleet, including a 
carrier and several missile-armed destroyers and corvettes, pulled back into territorial 
waters and played no further part in the conflict.
Section 4 – Principles and applications of  
maritime power

44
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
344
Maritime manoeuvre – The Battle of Magagascar, 1942
In early 1942, the British Government became worried that Japan might seek to capture 
the naval and air base at Diego Suarez in Vichy French Madagascar.  A landing directly 
into the town was too risky due to the well-defended, narrow channel leading to it.  The 
British force therefore exploited the mobility of sea power to land on the other, less 
well-defended side of the isthmus – at night, when the French believed navigation to 
be impossible.  This allowed the amphibious landing to avoid most of the defending 
forces, and to surprise and capture the few gun batteries facing them, while the Fleet Air 
Arm knocked out the defending air force in its base.  The land forces were then able to 
advance on the objective from an unexpected direction.
The foundations of maritime power
d. Blockade.  This allows the presence of a stronger maritime power to 
contain an adversary reluctant to fight, or force a decisive battle on them.
3.29. Sea control is unlikely to be an end in itself.  It provides the necessary baseline 
condition to allow use of the sea for further purposes such as maritime manoeuvre 
and maritime power projection. 
Julian Corbett, Some Principles of Naval Strategy
Maritime manoeuvre
3.30. Sea control and the legal framework which allows unrestricted access and 
presence no closer than 12 nautical miles from the baseline in peacetime is a key 
enabler for maritime manoeuvre.  The ability to operate, particularly in littoral areas, 
is of crucial importance, either as the main effort or as the staging area for deploying 
and sustaining ground forces.  Therefore, as well as the central requirement to be 
capable of controlling events at sea, UK maritime power must also be capable of 
influencing events on land from the sea.
3.31. Tactically the sea offers a hiding place for submarines; and even surface ships 
are hard to locate and identify if they are not radiating a significant electromagnetic 
or acoustic signature.  Mobility and the ability to relocate a large maritime force can 
gain the initiative and allow an adversary’s vulnerabilities to be exploited at a time 
‘Since men live upon the land and not upon the sea, great issues between nations at war 
have always been decided – except in the rarest cases – either by what your army can do 
against your enemy’s territory and national life or else by the fear of what the fleet makes it 
possible for your army to do.’

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
45
3
The foundations of maritime power
of choosing to demonstrate political will, apply influence or, if required, use force.  In 
international armed conflict, only the national waters of neutrals are not available to 
belligerents.
Maritime power projection
3.32.  Maritime power projection is the threat, or use, of national power from the 
sea to influence events.  It exploits sea control and maritime manoeuvre to achieve 
access to threaten or project force ashore using a combination of amphibious forces, 
embarked aircraft, land attack weapons, cyber capabilities, electronic warfare and 
special forces.
3.33.  There are numerous ways in which maritime power projection can contribute 
to a joint operation.
a. Shape.   The sea is, in most cases, a highway free from boundaries 
and frontiers that provides a valuable arena for joint force manoeuvre.  In 
preparation for subsequent operations, maritime forces can, for example, be 
employed to gather intelligence and/or mount non-combatant evacuation 
operations, withdrawing civilians from a potential combat zone.  Equally they 
may be used to insert special operations forces or to conduct amphibious 
operations.
b.  Reassure.   Before the build-up of friendly joint forces in theatre, the 
presence of maritime forces can be used to reassure a friendly state.  A state 
reassured by the presence of maritime forces is more likely to provide access, 
basing and overflight.
Naval gunfire is a method of projecting maritime power at sea or from the sea

46
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
346
Alliance 
maritime forces 
can guard the 
maritime flanks 
of an operating 
area and by 
doing so, limit 
the freedom of 
manoeuvre of an 
enemy.  
”
“
The foundations of maritime power
c. Deter.  Maritime forces can be used to deter an aggressor by deploying 
into a region at an early stage, at relatively low political risk and, if necessary, in 
considerable strength.
d. Coerce.  As maritime forces build up in theatre, they can demonstrate 
further resolve by launching discrete amounts of mixed land, air, or maritime 
power against key adversary targets to force an adversary away from one 
course of action or to compel them to take another.  Importantly, they can do 
this while having some measure of control over escalation.
e. Disrupt.  Prior to the main offensive, maritime forces can help to shift the 
emphasis from defensive to offensive operations by disrupting enemy activity 
through the use of amphibious raids into enemy territory.
f. Project.  Land manoeuvre seeks a position of advantage with respect to the 
enemy from which force can be threatened or applied.  An important role of 
maritime power projection forces, particularly amphibious forces, is to provide 
manoeuvre from the sea.  Speed of manoeuvre at sea will often surprise 
opponents ashore; a maritime force can move up to 400 nautical miles in a day.
g. Support.  During the execution of an operation, the maritime component’s 
full range of capabilities, in particular its ability to engage in precision attack, 
can support friendly forces ashore or in the air.  Additionally, the sea base may 
be used to flexibly and securely hold a reserve force or serve as a command 
platform; these functions have equal utility at both the start and the end of a 
conflict or crisis.
h. Limit.  Alliance maritime forces can guard the maritime flanks of an 
operating area and by doing so, limit the freedom of manoeuvre of an enemy.  
This also has the added advantage of greatly reducing the need for land forces 
to guard vulnerable coastal areas that are being protected by these same 
forces at sea.
i. Recover.  Finally, when it comes to withdrawal, the ability of maritime forces 
to transport large numbers of personnel and heavy items of equipment out 
of theatre, and protect them in the process, has often been a vital function.  
Equally, the sea base may be used to recover and reconstitute land forces but 
remain in theatre, acting as a strategic reserve.

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
47
3
The foundations of maritime power
 
Key points  
• Fighting power is at the core of every military service as it defines the ability to 
conduct successful operations.  It comprises three interrealated components – 
conceptual, moral and physical.
• Three core functions are employed to assist maritime commanders in planning 
and executing operations: understand; fight (shape, engage, exploit and protect); 
and sustain.
• Ethos is a key aspect of the Naval Service.  The core values comprise: 
commitment; courage; discipline; respect for others; and integrity.
• UK maritime forces globally deploy at readiness and can transition from 
peacetime operations to a state of war in a matter of hours.
• Sustainability is a key aspect of maritime forces.  A high level of self-sustainability 
and provisioning allows UK maritime forces to operate at distance from the UK 
for prolonged periods.
• Maritime forces have inherent attributes that all serve the purpose of providing 
national influence.  The attributes are: access; poise; persistence; mobility; and 
versatility.
• The adaptability of maritime forces is the pre-eminent quality which ensures that 
maritime power remains relevant in new and changing situations.
• The strategic use of maritime power is made possible through the concept of sea 
control and underpinned by the principles of maritime manoeuvre and maritime 
power projection.  These are supported by a number of operational approaches – 
decisive battle, sea denial and fleet-in-being.
• Maritime power projection is the threat, or use, of national power from the sea to 
influence events.

[Page 60: No extractable text]

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
49
Employing maritime 
power
Chapter 4 examines the three roles of maritime forces – 
war fighting, Defence Engagement and maritime security 
– how they come together with the other elements of 
military power to conduct joint action and the roles they 
undertake to support national objectives.
Chapter 4
4
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
Section 1 – Roles of maritime forces . . . . . . . . . . 51
Section 2 – The maritime contribution  
                       to military power  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Section 3 – Joint and multinational operations   . . . 61

50
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
450
“
”
A good navy is not a provocation to war.  
It is the surest guarantee of peace.
 
Theodore Roosevelt
Employing maritime power

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
51
4
Employing maritime power
Chapter 4 – Employing 
maritime power
4.1.  Traditionally maritime forces have been used by states for a wide variety of 
tasks.  The accepted consensus is that there is a ‘trinity’ of ‘three characteristic modes 
of action by which maritime forces operate: namely military, diplomatic and policing 
functions’.51  These functions have evolved to war fighting, maritime security and 
Defence Engagement as shown in Figure 4.1. 
Figure 4.1 – The three roles of UK maritime forces
4.2.  The primary objective of maritime power is to assist in preventing conflict 
through deterrence; conscious of the need to escalate if deterrence fails.  The ability 
to conduct each of the three roles contributes towards conflict prevention.  Ultimately 
the product of each role is more than simply preventing conflict; it is to support 
national objectives in helping shape a more stable international community.  The 
51 Ian Speller, Understanding Naval Warfare , 2014.
Defence Engagement
Maritime security 
War /f_ighting
The use 
of the sea
Section 1 – Roles of maritime forces

52
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
452
‘Soft power flows to the owner of hard power.’
Employing maritime power
three roles, collectively or individually, depending upon the specific circumstances, 
seek to stabilise the strategic maritime environment as well as help to ensure a secure 
and resilient UK.
4.3. In practice, most operations undertaken by maritime forces will incorporate 
aspects of each of these three roles.  They are interrelated and may be conducted 
concurrently or consecutively with little or no physical change to the force structure.  
Often the boundaries between maritime security and war fighting operations may be 
difficult to distinguish and will invariably involve Defence Engagement as well.  This 
versatility is one of the most valuable features of maritime forces; they offer options to 
decision-makers for escalation or de-escalation simply by altering posture.
Role 1 – war fighting
        Joseph Nye52 
4.4. A credible hard power capability provides the foundations on which the softer 
roles of maritime security and Defence Engagement are built.  Therefore, at its core 
UK maritime forces must be able to deter potential aggressive acts against the UK, 
and where this fails, conduct successful combat operations in pursuit of the national 
interest.  In this role maritime forces will generally be configured into a maritime 
task group,53 able to project maritime power through either carrier strike54 or littoral 
manoeuvre,55 which provides the capability of projecting a landing force ashore.
Role 2 – maritime security
4.5. Exploiting powers under international, national and cooperating partner states 
law, maritime security operations are conducted against a wide range of activities.  
Principally the focus is on the support to trade, including fisheries, to safeguard 
national prosperity.  However, other activities include: defence (short of war fighting); 
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief; non-combatant evacuation operations; 
and countering piracy, slavery, people smuggling, illegal immigration, drug smuggling, 
arms smuggling, terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
52 Joseph Nye, Hard, Soft and Smart Power, 2013. 
53 A maritime task group or force is a group of maritime military assets assigned together for a specific 
purpose.
54 Carrier strike is the ability to use fixed-wing aircraft from a maritime base to project military power 
from the sea.
55 Littoral manoeuvre is exploiting the access and freedom provided by the sea as a basis for operational 
manoeuvre.

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
53
4
‘…navies have shown themselves to be uniquely useful as instruments for the conduct of 
foreign policy for time immemorial.  As such, they express the foreign policy objectives of 
the state.  Depending on the nature of those objectives, naval diplomacy can be used in a 
competitive or collaborative way, or, more usually, some mixture of the two.’
Employing maritime power
Role 3 – Defence Engagement
Professor Geoffrey Till 56 
4.6.  The versatility and mobility of maritime forces provides a means for political 
and diplomatic influence in international relations.  Conflict prevention is a key tenet 
of the UK’s overall security strategy.  Such influence requires an investment in  
long-term habitual engagement that creates worthwhile connections that engender 
trust.  When executed effectively, conflict prevention promotes, develops and 
maintains stable relationships between states and encourages cooperation and 
conciliation in managing international affairs.  It is a gradual and deliberate process 
that takes time, effort and persistence.  Relationships need to be nurtured and 
encouraged through regular dialogue and demonstrations of national intent 
involving all levers of national power.  In addition, the Government acknowledges 
that Royal Navy ships’ visits are an important way of projecting the UK’s soft power 
globally,57 and it is a clear demonstration of the ‘international by design’ intent.  The 
added benefit is that greater stability leads to greater trade and prosperity. 
56  Professor Geoffrey Till, Seapower: A Guide for the Twenty-First Century, 3rd Edition, 2013, page 221.
57  National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015, A Secure and Prosperous 
United Kingdom (NSS and SDSR 2015), available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-
security-strategy-and-strategic-defence-and-security-review-2015
A type 23 frigate provides maritime security in the Northern Arabian Gulf

54
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
454
Employing maritime power
4.7. While all Services contribute to maritime forces, the principal actor is the Naval 
Service.  There are four fighting arms of the Naval Service, supported by the Royal Fleet 
Auxiliary.
a. The surface fleet. 58  The various platforms of the surface fleet promote and 
protect UK national interest at home and abroad.
(1) Aircraft Carriers.  Aircraft carriers have been a core capability of the 
Naval Service since the First World War.  The introduction of HMS Queen 
Elizabeth followed by HMS Prince of Wales will see the resumption of carrier 
operations able to provide a maritime power projection capability for fixed-
wing carrier strike, rotary wing strike and littoral manoeuvre operations.  The 
two Queen Elizabeth Class carriers will provide the focus for UK task group 
operations for the next 50 years. 
(2) Frigates and destroyers.  Frigates and destroyers are multipurpose 
combatants with an emphasis on anti-submarine warfare and anti-air warfare 
respectively, but with capabilities in many disciplines, including the ability 
to provide fire support and air defence to forces ashore.  They are able to 
deploy autonomously for extended periods and their versatility allows them 
to cover a wide range of tasks across all three maritime roles, in particular 
establishing presence.  They are essential elements of any task group.
(3) Amphibious shipping.  The UK’s amphibious shipping constitutes ships 
of the Royal Navy, the Royal Fleet Auxiliary and, when necessary, chartered 
merchant vessels.  These platforms provide the littoral manoeuvre capability 
that enables the maritime power projection of a land force as part of an 
amphibious task group.
(4) Mine countermeasures vessels.  Mine countermeasures vessels operate 
in the approaches to harbours and choke points where they are used to 
maintain the flow of both commercial and naval shipping.  They are also 
tasked with ensuring access to the open ocean for the nuclear deterrent and 
an important element of task groups, particularly in advanced sea control 
operations or to clear the amphibious operating areas prior to a landing.
58 http://www.royalnavy.mod.uk/our-organisation/the-fighting-arms/surface-fleet
Section 2 – The maritime contribution  
to military power

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
55
4
Employing maritime power
Section 2 – The maritime contribution  
to military power
(5) Hydrographic and oceanographic survey vessels.   Hydrographic and 
oceanographic survey vessels provide a specialist military data gathering 
capability in support of safety of navigation, the production of charts, 
and maritime and joint operations, including the nuclear deterrent. 
Hydrographic, oceanographic and meteorological information is used to 
inform campaign planning and to provide situational understanding.  It is 
a vital precursor to theatre entry and littoral manoeuvre.  Survey vessels 
require a measure of forward support and appropriate force protection 
when operating in a sub-surface, surface or air threat environment. 
(6)  Patrol vessels.   Specialised vessels are deployed routinely on patrol 
around the UK and Overseas Territories, chiefly on maritime security 
operations undertaking constabulary tasks, to protect sovereignty, 
economic interests and ensuring good order and security of the maritime 
environment.  Their capabilities extend to the full extent of the UK’s fishing 
and energy zones.  For fishery protection, the ships are an integrated 
capability operated under contract to the Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA).  They patrol UK waters protecting UK fishing 
vessels and enforcing fisheries regulations but may be more widely tasked 
to support government departments contributing to maritime security.  
HMS Protector (the Royal Navy’s ice patrol ship) makes annual deployments 
to Antarctic waters to demonstrate the national commitment to the 
Antarctic Treaty, exercise sovereignty over the British Antarctic Territories 
and to provide assistance to the British Antarctic Survey; it also concurrently 
undertakes hydrographic survey and meteorological work.
HMS Protector on annual deployment in Antarctic waters

56
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
456
Employing maritime power
b. The Submarine Service.59  The Royal Navy operates a mix of ballistic missile 
and conventionally armed submarines – all are nuclear powered to give them 
global reach.
(1) Providing nuclear deterrence (Operation RELENTLESS) is a Defence Task 
in its own right and the Defence priority.  A force of four Vanguard-class 
nuclear powered submarines (ship submersible ballistic nuclear (SSBN)) 
with nuclear armed ballistic missiles is operated such that at least one is 
continually on deterrent patrol; known as the ‘continuous at sea deterrent’ 
(CASD). 
(2) Nuclear powered attack submarines (ship submersible nuclear (SSN)) 
provide the principal sea denial capability due to having both anti-submarine 
and anti-ship systems.  When combined with an appropriate land attack 
missile, such as the Tomahawk, SSNs have a power projection capability of 
considerable range and penetrability, with important uses for deterrence and 
coercion.  SSNs can also covertly gather intelligence, and insert and recover 
special forces.  They can operate independently or in conjunction with 
surface and air forces and contribute to protecting the nuclear deterrent.
59 http://www.royalnavy.mod.uk/our-organisation/the-fighting-arms/submarine-service
For the UK the nuclear deterrent is delivered by the submarine enabled continuous at sea deterrent

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
57
4
Employing maritime power
c. The Fleet Air Arm. 60  The Fleet Air Arm is the Naval Service’s maritime 
aviation capability and consists of specialist anti-submarine, anti-surface, 
airborne surveillance, reconnaissance and battlefield support helicopters.  
However, their versatility enables them to carry out a number of secondary roles 
such as search and rescue.  In addition the Fleet Air Arm 809 Naval Air Squadron 
will operate the F-35B Lightning II aircraft alongside the Royal Air Force (RAF) 
and will be able to deliver carrier strike, control of the air, and intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance when full operating capability is achieved.  
When operating in a maritime task group aviation assets will be integrated into 
an embarked tailored air group.  A tailored air group is configured to provide 
the aircraft to meet the operational requirement and will vary depending on 
whether supporting carrier strike or littoral manoeuvre.  Along with Fleet Air 
Arm aircraft it is likely to include aviation assets such as battlefield attack and 
support helicopters from the Joint Helicopter Command of the British Army and 
fixed wing aircraft from the RAF.
d. The Royal Marines. 61  The Corps of the Royal Marines are a light infantry force 
who are highly specialised in amphibious warfare.  Held at very high readiness 
and optimised for worldwide rapid response they are fully integrated with the 
Royal Navy’s amphibious ships.  They can be deployed globally without host 
nation support and can be projected from the sea to conduct operations on 
land.   
These operations range from raids to full assaults as the spearhead of littoral 
manoeuvre operations.  In addition, the Royal Marines conduct the specialist 
role of security for the nuclear deterrent.
e.  The Royal Fleet Auxiliary. 62  Although not officially classed as a fighting 
arm by the Queens Regulations for the Royal Navy, the ships of the Royal Fleet 
Auxiliary are of vital importance to maritime forces.  Primarily they provide the 
sustainability through fuel, food, stores and ordnance that can be transferred at 
sea to enable persistence, which sits at the heart of maritime operations.  With 
the ability to embark helicopters and significant elements of a landing force, 
the Royal Fleet Auxiliary is a vital asset in supporting operations.  They are also 
capable of undertaking activities such as anti-piracy and disaster relief in their 
own right.  
4.8.  Elements of land forces.  British Army forces play a significant role in the 
maritime environment.  As well as those members of the British Army integrated 
into 3 Commando Brigade in artillery, engineering and logistic functions, army 
personnel based at sea as part of a landing group are classed as part of that maritime 
60  http://www.royalnavy.mod.uk/our-organisation/the-fighting-arms/fleet-air-arm
61  http://www.royalnavy.mod.uk/our-organisation/the-fighting-arms/royal-marines
62  http://www.royalnavy.mod.uk/our-organisation/the-fighting-arms/royal-fleet-auxiliary
British Army 
forces play a 
significant  
role in the 
maritime 
environment.
”
“

58
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
458
Employing maritime power
force.  In addition, 17 Port and Maritime Regiment provides the UK Armed Forces’ 
only specialist port and maritime component designed to facilitate the loading and 
offloading of military equipment at ports across the globe.  The Joint Helicopter 
Command63 is the principal contributor of support helicopters to provide the 
lift capability required to enable littoral manoeuvre and battlefield attack and 
reconnaissance helicopters to a tailored air group.
4.9. Elements of air forces.  Embarked aircraft project maritime power from the sea 
as part of a maritime force, although the command and control of joint assets may be 
invested elsewhere within the joint force.  Air force personnel are also an integral part 
of a maritime force providing specialist air knowledge.  In addition, land-based aircraft 
can also influence the maritime environment through providing force protection, 
battlespace management, reconnaissance, surveillance, targeting, air-to air refuelling, 
air defence, attack and logistics resupply to the maritime force.  The speed of transit, 
wide sensor and communications fit, ability to cover large areas and substantial 
capacity for weapons, make maritime patrol aircraft such as the P-8A Poseidon, 
important contributors to both anti-surface and anti-submarine warfare.  They are 
optimised for area anti-submarine operations, surveillance and reconnaissance and 
search and rescue, and may be well placed to provide some command and control 
capabilities. 
4.10. Chartered shipping.  An amphibious force will normally include chartered 
shipping to complement the lift provided by specialist amphibious shipping.  
Chartered shipping may include transport for personnel (passenger vessels), vehicles 
(roll-on/roll-off ferries), hospital ships, container ships, water ships, tankers and 
specialist lift shipping, such as semi-submersibles to transport additional landing 
craft.  All with the purpose of projecting a land force from the sea.
Maritime task group operations
4.11. The maritime component to a joint force will be provided through a maritime 
task group able to deliver sea control and maritime power projection.  This task group 
will generally be comprised of a capital ship such as an aircraft carrier or amphibious 
vessel accompanied by frigates, destroyers, submarines, mine clearance vessels and 
support shipping; plus fixed- and rotary-wing aircraft and potentially a landing force 
from across the three Services, providing a truly joint maritime power projection 
capability. 
4.12. The Carrier Enabled Power Projection (CEPP) programme will deliver an 
integrated and sustainable joint capability, interoperable with our North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) Allies and other coalition partners.  CEPP coordinates the 
63 In the UK’s Armed Forces structure Joint Helicopter Command is part of the British Army.
Air force 
personnel 
are also an 
integral part of a 
maritime force 
providing 
specialist air 
knowledge.
”
“

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
59
4
The value of Carrier Enabled Power Projection
‘The delivery of the Carrier Enabled Power Projection (CEPP) programme will offer a step 
change in the UK’s ability to globally project decisive military power and influence, either 
independently or as part of a coalition operation. It will exploit the attributes of maritime, 
air and land forces to deter, coerce or deliver action across the 3 environments.’
CEPP concept of employment, 2014
‘CEPP provides the UK with increased freedom of action and policy choice, including 
when responding to crises.  It projects our national power and influence, and reassures 
our allies and partners.  It is an important element of our modern deterrence posture and 
will contribute to all three of national security objectives set out in the National Security 
Strategy 2015.’
CEPP Policy Statement, November 2016
Employing maritime power
delivery of the Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers, F-35B Lightning II aircraft, Merlin 
CROWSNEST, battlefield helicopters and enabling capabilities to:
• deliver carrier strike;
• support littoral manoeuvre; and
• deliver humanitarian assistance and other Defence Engagement operations.
4.13.  Carrier strike  allows the maritime task group to strike targets from anywhere 
in the world.  The UK will operate a mix of aircraft from its Queen Elizabeth Class 
aircraft carriers – secure, sovereign and well-found airbases which can move freely 
through the world’s oceans.64  In the carrier strike role the ships will routinely carry 
and fully support the F-35B Lightning II aircraft.  They will also embark the multi-role 
Merlin Mark 2 helicopter which will be used to deliver intelligence, surveillance, target 
acquisition and reconnaissance, and air-space management. 
4.14.  When required this tailored air group can be shaped to provide either a strike 
focus with the ship routinely carrying F-35B Lightning II aircraft, with the capacity to 
surge to a maximum of 36, or when supporting littoral manoeuvre to embark greater 
numbers of support and attack helicopters.  Transition between roles can be achieved 
when the ship is deployed. 
64  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/62491/Factsheet9-
Carrier-Strike.pdf

60
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
460
Employing maritime power
4.15. Littoral manoeuvre is exploiting the access and freedom provided by the sea 
as a basis for operational manoeuvre from which a sea-based amphibious force can 
influence situations, decisions and events in the littoral regions of the world.  The 
ability to deploy a land force from a sea base is a key capability of the maritime force. 
4.16. The UK’s specialist amphibious forces represent a comprehensive range of 
capabilities, fully able to operate independently or alongside allies and partners.  They 
comprise three essential components:
• the landing force;
• specialist amphibious shipping; and
• the tailored air group.
4.17. The landing force is provided by 3 Commando Brigade Royal Marines in the 
form of the lead commando group.  The lead commando group comprises personnel 
from the Royal Marines and British Army, who can be landed and sustained from the 
sea.  This may be supporting a larger land campaign, exploiting the maritime flank, 
or conducting discreet operations (such as a raid), a non-combatant evacuation 
operation or limited theatre entry.  The lead commando group aims to be established 
ashore within six hours, using both landing craft and helicopters.  Aviation assets 
and landing craft can be regrouped to the landing force during ongoing operations 
enabling the amphibious shipping to be tasked elsewhere.
An Apache attack helicopter on the deck of HMS Ocean
Section 3 – Joint and multinational operations

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
61
4
Employing maritime power
4.18.  The Royal Navy’s specialist amphibious shipping can tactically offload, sustain 
and recover the landing force without recourse to harbours or airfields, in hostile, or 
potentially hostile environments.  They provide the launch platforms for assaults and 
raids by landing craft and helicopters.  The amphibious shipping65 has the necessary 
command and control facilities for up to a brigade size operation, and are capable 
of landing a company group surface assault, heavy equipment (such as armour) and 
landing force vehicles and equipment. 
Command and control
4.19.  The scale and type of mission will determine the command and control of an 
operation.  When conducting joint operations the command and control construct 
will be detailed within the Chief of the Defence Staff’s Directive.  This will invest 
command and control functions in the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) based at 
Northwood, who will delegate command and control to the appropriate operational 
component commander.  Otherwise the operational command and control of 
maritime forces will rest through the Royal Navy’s 2* Commander Operations  based 
at Northwood.  The local command of a task group is usually conducted at the 1* 
level, but can be scaled up to a 2* battle staff dependent on the size and complexity 
of the operation. 
4.20.  UK maritime forces routinely include capabilities of the Royal Navy and 
components of the British Army and RAF to support the military instrument to 
national power, particularly when operating in a task group.  Maritime forces 
are therefore predominately a joint force.66  These forces, along with all other 
government departments, should be integrated behind a common national goal, 
and synchronised to create best effect.  In the UK this is known as the full spectrum 
approach, with the military component of this referred to as joint action.
4.21.  NATO is at the heart of UK Defence, therefore a UK national approach will 
generally be framed within a broader multinational response including allies, 
international organisations and non-governmental organisations.  This multinational 
approach creates greater opportunities and capabilities, but can also generate 
frictions, where national objectives differ.  Developing coherence on areas such as risk 
65  Currently provided by HMS Albion and HMS Bulwark landing platform dock (LPD) ships.
66  Joint force is defined as: a force composed of significant elements of two or more Services operating 
under a single commander authorised to exercise operational command and control.  Joint Doctrine 
Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Supplement to the NATO Terminology Database , 8th Edition.
Section 3 – Joint and multinational operations

62
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
462
Employing maritime power
and identifying priorities can be challenging, with the adversary able to exploit these 
potential differences.67 
Joint action
4.22. Joint action is the orchestration of national military capabilities and activities 
to achieve influence in pursuit of national objectives.  It is the combination of attack 
and defensive capabilities, information activities and the ability to outreach and 
manoeuvre to affect an actor’s will, capability or understanding.  Maritime forces 
are a key contributor to joint action.  In recognising the primacy of influence as 
an objective, maritime power is highly capable of providing influence without 
commitment.  By using the attributes of the maritime environment, maritime forces 
can use maritime manoeuvre and maritime power projection to affect an actor’s will, 
understanding or capabilities.  Often this presence can act as a method of conflict 
prevention.
Admiral Sir Mark Stanhope68
4.23. Joint action coordinates and synchronises:
• fires (military power effect through both physical and virtual means);
• information activities (including regional and key leader engagement);
• manoeuvre (the ability to remain mobile to gain advantage in time and 
space); and
• outreach (including stabilisation, support to governance and capacity 
building).
Joint operations
4.24. A joint operation is one where two or more of the Royal Navy, British Army 
and RAF operate as a single military force, under a single command structure, to 
67 JDP 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine , covers multi-agency planning in greater detail and is available at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/campaigning-a-joint-doctrine-publication
68 Speaking when First Sea Lord at the International Institute for Strategic Studies, 24 February 2010.
‘Our presence in the first place: engagement without entanglement may be a 
sufficient demonstration of intent and deterrence to prevent the need for final 
engagement.’

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
63
4
Employing maritime power
accomplish a specific mission. 69  Maritime forces are often joint but when constructed 
of only the Naval Service will often contain an air power (Fleet Air arm) and land 
power component (Royal Marines).  Maritime power therefore offers policy-makers 
with a broad range of military options to achieve specific national objectives.  
Maritime power enhances the scale of options for the joint force.  Through access 
and mobility, maritime power projection in the form of carrier strike can reach almost 
any battlespace and provide a persistent presence.  In addition, support shipping can 
provide vital deployment, sustainment and recovery capabilities.  
4.25.  As a maritime force is likely to be joint, it can be used independently or in 
conjunction with coordinated air and land operations to create a larger joint force.  A 
sole maritime force does not have the same capacity as a joint operation.  Therefore, 
for enduring operations, UK maritime forces will operate within a joint approach.
4.26.  Although the effects of joint action are primarily targeted at an adversary, 
it has an impact on a wide range of other actors that also need to be influenced.  
This can include civilian partners, such as non-governmental organisations, the UK 
population, allies and regional audiences.  Such engagement and influence helps 
preserve freedom of action for military operations.  Therefore, joint action requires 
coordination or integration with the activities of other government departments in a 
full spectrum approach.70
69  In most instances the maritime component to joint action will be coordinated through the Permanent 
Joint Headquarters (PJHQ).
70  The full spectrum approach develops the integrated approach (described in JDP 0-01, UK Defence 
Doctrine, 5th Edition) by widening it to include all parts of Government.  For further information see Her 
Majesty’s Government (HMG), Full Spectrum Approach Primer, 2017.
Joint Helicopter Command Chinook helicopters from  
the RAF operating as part of a joint maritime force

64
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
464
Employing maritime power
Full spectrum approach
4. 27. Effective crisis management requires active cross-government and  
multi-agency cooperation, to develop, employ and sustain a comprehensive and 
successful response.  The full spectrum approach to national power is therefore an 
approach which deals with a wide variety of challenges by creating and managing 
strategies to address complex problems.   It employs diplomatic, economic and 
military instruments of national power to achieve desired political and strategic 
objectives.  The coordination and synchronisation of these capabilities reduces 
duplication of effort, creates synergies and leads to more effective use of resources.  
UK maritime power is a key component of the full spectrum approach, as part of the 
broader Defence input.  Figure 4.2 highlights the relationship between joint action 
and the full spectrum approach.
Figure 4.2 – The relationship between joint action and the full spectrum approach
The Joint Expeditionary Force
4.28. One of the principal ways in which joint action will be demonstrated is 
through the Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF).  Whilst not a standing force, the UK 
components of the JEF are a pool of high readiness and contingent forces that 
provide a flexible expeditionary intervention capability across maritime, land, air and 
     Information   
            Information   
Information
activities Outreach
Fires
Joint
action
Manoeuvre
Diplomatic
Military
Economic
Full
spectrum
approach
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Strategic narrative                                                                                                                                                                                                           Strategic narrative
UK maritime 
power is a 
key component 
of the full 
spectrum 
approach...
”
“

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
65
4
Employing maritime power
joint environments that can operate alongside key allies and partners.   For example, 
it can be developed as:
• a UK-led framework for partner nations; 71
• the Combined Joint Expeditionary Force (CJEF) with France, or
• part of a broader coalition effort.
4.29.  The maritime component of the JEF is referred to as the Joint Expeditionary 
Force (Maritime) (JEF(M)).  The JEF (M) will demonstrate the ability to project a highly 
effective UK maritime component anywhere in the world, whilst reassuring our allies.  
It will be capable of conducting a wide range of operations, including conventional 
deterrence, combat operations and humanitarian assistance.  The JEF(M) will be 
organised around a single maritime task group consisting of capital ships,72 frigates 
and destroyers, afloat support and, potentially, a landing force, aviation, mine 
countermeasures vessels and nuclear powered attack submarines.  The two central 
capabilities that the JEF(M) will offer are carrier strike and littoral manoeuvre.  Both 
capabilities seek to create considerable land effect from the maritime environment.  
Until carrier strike reaches its initial operating capability, the primary output of the 
JEF(M) is littoral manoeuvre at commando group level.
4.30.  In a JEF(M) context the Commander UK Task Group, working closely with the 
landing force commander, will likely command the JEF(M) at sea, before becoming 
the supporting commander once the landing force is ashore and established.  Due 
to its joint nature the JEF(M) relies upon elements of all three Services to function 
appropriately.
71  In April 2016, the Joint Expeditionary Force (JEF) partner nations comprised Denmark, Estonia, 
Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the UK, although there are aspirations to 
expand the JEF regional membership into the High North.
72  HMS Albion and HMS Bulwark LPDs, with HMS Ocean landing platform helicopter (LPH) (out of service 
in 2018), the Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers will perform this central function.

66
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
466
Employing maritime power
 
Key points  
• The accepted consensus is that there is a ‘trinity’ of ‘three characteristic modes 
of action by which maritime forces operate: namely military, diplomatic and 
policing functions’.  These functions have evolved to war fighting, maritime 
security and Defence Engagement.
• The ability to conduct war fighting is the essential aspect for a military force as 
soft power flows to the owner of hard power.
• The Naval Service is the main actor within the maritime environment.  It 
comprises of four fighting arms supported by the Royal Fleet Auxiliary.  The 
fighting arms are: the surface fleet; the Submarine Service; the Fleet Air Arm; and 
the Royal Marines.
• UK maritime forces routinely include capabilities of the Royal Navy and 
components of the British Army and Royal Air Force to support the military 
instrument to national power, particularly when operating in a task group.  
Maritime forces are therefore predominately a joint force. 
• Multinational (predominantly through NATO) and bilateral operations and 
exercises are common place within the maritime environment.   
• The Maritime component of the UK Joint Expeditionary Force is referred to as the 
Joint Expeditionary Force (Maritime) JEF(M).  
• Carrier Enabled Power Project (CEPP) is the programme that will deliver the 
UK a carrier strike capability and support littoral manoeuvre which will be the 
cornerstone of the JEF(M) capability, and the maritime’s contribution to joint 
action.

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
67
Lexicon
Part 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
AAP   Allied administrative publication  
AJP  Allied joint publication
CASD   continuous at sea deterrence  
CEMA  cyber and electromagnetic activities 
CEPP   Carrier Enabled Power Projection  
CDS  Chief of the Defence Staff 
CJEF  Combined Joint Expeditionary Force
DEFRA  Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
DFID   Department for International Development
EEZ   exclusive economic zone  
EU   European Union
FAA  Fleet Air Arm
GVA   gross value added
HADR   humanitarian assistance and disaster relief  
HMG   Her Majesty’s Government
ISAF   International Security Assistance Force
JDP  joint doctrine publication 
JEF  Joint Expeditionary Force 
JEF(M)  Joint Expeditionary Force (Maritime)
 
LPD   landing platform dock  
LPH  landing platform helicopter 
LSD(A)   landing ship dock (auxiliary)
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
NEO   non-combatant evacuation operation  
Lexicon

68
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)68
NSO  national security objectives 
NSS  National Security Strategy
PJHQ  Permanent Joint Headquarters
RAF  Royal Air Force 
RFA  Royal Fleet Auxiliary 
RUSI  Royal United Services Institute
SDSR  Strategic Defence and Security Review 
SSBN  ship submersible ballistic nuclear 
SSN  ship submersible nuclear
UNCLOS  United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
Lexicon

JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)
69
Lexicon
Part 2 – Terms and definitions
This section is divided into three areas.  First, we list new terms proposed by this 
publication.  We then list modified definitions proposed by this publication and finally 
we list endorsed terms and their definitions.
maritime power 
The ability to apply maritime military capabilities at and from the sea to influence the 
behaviour of actors and the course of events.  (JDP 0-10, 5th Edition)
littoral region  
Those land areas (and their adjacent areas and associated air space) that are 
susceptible to engagement and influence from the sea.  (JDP 0-10, 5th Edition) 
hard power  
The threat or use of military or economic coercion or physical effect to achieve 
influence.  (JDP 04, 2nd Edition)
influence  
The capacity to have an effect on the character or behaviour of someone or 
something, or the effect itself.  ( Concise Oxford English Dictionary)
joint force 
A force composed of significant elements of two or more Services operating under a 
single commander authorised to exercise operational command or control.  (JDP 01)
Endorsed definitions
New definitions
Modified definitions

70
JDP 0-10 (5th Edition)70
Lexicon
soft power 
The ability to persuade or encourage others to adopt an alternative approach.   
(JDP 04, 2nd Edition)
sustainability 
The ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of combat power for the duration 
required to achieve its objectives.  (NATOTerm)
understanding 
The perception and interpretation of a particular situation in order to provide the 
context, insight and foresight required for effective decision-making.   
(JDP 04, 2nd Edition) 

[Page 83: No extractable text]

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 10/17
Published by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc


