 
Joint Doctrine Publication 3-51Non-combatant Evacuation OperationsThird Edition Version 2
Joint Doctrine Publication 3-51
Non-combatant Evacuation
Operations 
Third Edition Version 2

[Page 2: No extractable text]

i
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Joint Doctrine Publication 3-51
Non-combatant Evacuation 
Operations
Joint Doctrine Publication 3-51 (JDP 3-51)  
(3rd Edition, Version 2), dated July 2023, is promulgated as 
directed by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 

Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via email at: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk 
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2023) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated).
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbeywood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk
Distribution
All DCDC publications, including a biannual DCDC Publications Disk, can be 
demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre. 
  
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet (RLI) at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/IntranetUKStratCom/SitePages/
development-concepts-and-doctrine-centre-dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
ii
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)

iii
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Preface
 
Purpose
1. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 3-51, Non-combatant Evacuation 
Operations provides insight, guidance and points to consider when planning 
and conducting a non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO). 
Context
2. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) is 
responsible for coordinating the evacuation of British nationals from areas 
of crises, often with support from other government departments, such 
as the Ministry of Defence (MOD). Integration between the FCDO and 
MOD is paramount to success, whether it is through planning support or 
providing military assets to conduct a NEO. The necessary interaction for 
this type of crisis is recognised in a service level agreement between the two 
departments.
Audience
3. JDP 3-51 is intended for use primarily by military commanders and their 
staff at the strategic and operational levels of command. The publication also 
acts as a useful guide to diplomatic staff serving in the UK and overseas. It 
should inform local FCDO contingency evacuation plans where appropriate. 
Although the doctrine highlights some tactical-level considerations, it does not 
attempt to cover tactics, techniques and procedures.1 
4. A NEO is a non-discretionary operation that often requires a national 
response. Differing interests and risk thresholds often result in countries 
responding to crisis in different ways. Although evacuations are likely to be 
conducted in a multinational setting, the interaction between nations will 
probably be limited to the coordination of separate national plans rather than a 
unified multinational endeavour. However, commanders and their staff should 
read North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) doctrine on NEOs in addition to 
1 Permanent Joint Headquarters is responsible for providing tactical-level guidance on 
NEOs.

iv
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
this publication to understand the challenges of operating as part of a coalition 
when conducting a multinational evacuation.2
Structure
5. JDP 3-51 is divided into five chapters and includes a lexicon. An overview 
of the chapters is as follows.
a. Chapter 1 – Context, characteristics and process. Chapter 1 
describes the context in which a NEO may be authorised, the 
characteristics of a NEO that make it different from other crisis response 
operations and the evacuation process.
b. Chapter 2 – Responsibilities and command and control. Chapter 2 
describes the various roles and responsibilities of the FCDO and the MOD. 
Moreover, it discusses how an inter-agency NEO is commanded and 
controlled.
c. Chapter 3 – Planning. Chapter 3 explains what planning occurs at 
the strategic and operational levels. It describes how planning should take 
place with partners across government and several factors particular to 
a NEO. Annex 3A lists the key themes to be included in the operational 
estimate. Annex 3B describes the legal basis for a NEO. 
d. Chapter 4 – Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation.  
Chapter 4 describes the phases of a NEO. Annex 4A describes the key 
characteristics of the staging posts within an evacuation chain.
e. Chapter 5 – Service support. Chapter 5 provides guidance on both 
logistic and medical considerations necessary for a successful NEO.
Linkages
6. JDP 3-51 complements Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3, Allied Joint 
Doctrine for the Conduct of Operations (with UK national elements), JDP 4-00, 
Logistics for Joint Operations and AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning 
of Operations (with UK national elements) and should therefore be read in 
conjunction with these core publications. JDP 3-51, 3rd Edition, Version 2 
supersedes JDP 3-51, 3rd Edition.
2 Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.4.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Non-combatant Evacuation 
Operations. AJP-3.4.2 also provides a degree of tactical-level guidance.

v
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Version 2 changes
7. Since publication of the third edition of JDP 3-51 in March 2021, the 
MOD has supported the FCDO in three substantial NEOs: Afghanistan (2021), 
Ukraine (2022) and Sudan (2023). The successful evacuation from Kabul in 
2021 (Operation Pitting) was the largest such operation in over 70 years and 
was followed by a comprehensive Defence-wide review conducted by Defence 
Operational Capability.3 The recommendations from their assessment of 
Operation Pitting have driven the majority of amendments in this new version, 
together with observations from Ukraine (Operation Copperwing) and more 
recently Sudan (Operation Polarbear), which have reinforced many of the 
lessons from Kabul. 
8. This revised version contains substantial additions to Chapter 3, including 
greater detailed guidance on: operational waivers and dispensations; the 
development of cross-government indicators and warnings; the employment of 
an operational reserve; anticipating a surge in application interest from eligible 
persons at the point of crisis; and additional guidance on eligibility checks and 
processing capacity. Annex 4A contains new guidance on the selection of 
the evacuation handling centre and temporary safe location, including reserve 
or secondary locations, and processing capacity. Finally, Chapter 5 contains 
revised logistic and medical guidance.  
9. Through liaison with the principal organisations across Defence involved in 
supporting and learning from such operations (Security Policy and Operations, 
Permanent Joint Headquarters, Joint Force Headquarters, Defence 
Operational Capability), and other government departments (principally the 
FCDO and the Home Office), this revised version avoids capturing lessons 
from specific circumstances and seeks to convey enduring themes and 
considerations that are applicable to any subsequent NEO. This new version of 
JDP 3-51 remains military doctrine that is principally for military commanders 
and planners; however, partners from both the FCDO and Home Office have 
had input to these revisions, reflecting an integrated national approach to 
planning and execution.  
3  Op PITTING Defence Operational Capability Assessment 06/21 . Minister for Armed 
Forces endorsed 26 September 2022.

vi
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)

vii
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Contents
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Chapter 1 – Context, characteristics and process . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – Responsibilities and command and control . . . . . 17
Chapter 3 – Planning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Chapter 4 – Implementing a non-combatant evacuation  
                    operation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Chapter 5 – Service support. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

[Page 10: No extractable text]

Chapter 1 describes the context in which a non-combatant 
evacuation operation may be authorised, the characteristics 
of a non-combatant evacuation operation that make it 
different from other crisis response operations and the 
evacuation process.
Section 1 – Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – The operating environment  . . . . . . . . 4
Section 3 – Characteristics of a non-combatant  
                   evacuation operation  . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Section 4 – The process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Chapter 1

”
“NEOs are about people.  
The most powerful factor in 
delivering mission success was the 
agile mindset of all personnel in the 
Rapid Extraction Task Force.
 
Commanding Officer,  
40 Commando Royal Marines,  
Op POLARBEAR – 40 Commando Royal 
Marines Post Operation Report, 12 June 2023 
2
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
1
Context, characteristics and process

Chapter 1
Context, characteristics 
and process
Section 1 – Background
1.1. The safety and security of British nationals overseas is the responsibility 
of the country that these individuals are resident, or temporarily located within 
(except the case of UK government staff who remain the responsibility of the 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO)). Notwithstanding 
this, in the event of a crisis that requires eligible persons to be evacuated, 
it will be the FCDO who coordinates the evacuation.4 Depending on the 
nature of the crisis, the FCDO may request support from other government 
departments, including the Ministry of Defence (MOD). Support from the MOD 
may vary in scale from a limited planning support function to a fully resourced 
non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO).
1.2. A NEO is defined as: an operation conducted to relocate designated 
non-combatants threatened in a foreign country to a place of safety.5 A  
NEO supports a FCDO-led evacuation. A non-combatant who is eligible  
for evacuation by the UK is termed an eligible person. Eligible persons will 
include British nationals and those individuals from other nations for whom 
the UK government and His Majesty’s Representative6 have accepted 
responsibility. An individual’s eligibility will be determined by the FCDO and  
Border Force. 
1.3. Multiple states are likely to be affected by a crisis in a country where 
there is a significant multinational community. The decision to evacuate 
respective nationals by these countries will rarely be simultaneous due to their 
perception of the threat, domestic pressures and the nature of their interests in 
the given country. However, a decision to respond by one country often has a 
catalysing effect on others to do likewise. As a result of the inherent variance in 
national political thresholds for action and the potential speed of onset, NEOs 
4 Crises could include: countries in conflict; civil disorder; or natural disasters.
5 NATOTerm.
6 His Majesty’s Representative will be the ambassador or most senior diplomat in 
country.
3
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
1
Context, characteristics and process

are unlikely to be conducted as a multinational operation acting under a single 
headquarters.7 
1.4. The legal basis. The provisions of national and international law limit the 
conduct of all military operations, including NEOs. The legal justification for the 
UK Armed Forces to enter another state to evacuate eligible persons may arise 
in different ways, based on a variety of factors. These may include the consent 
of the host government and its ability or willingness to protect foreign nationals 
during crisis. See Annex 3B for more information on legal issues and the rules 
of engagement.
Section 2 – The operating environment
1.5. The degree of access afforded by the host government afforded by 
the host government, or irregular actors operating within the crisis area, will 
determine the level of threat and risk to the eligible persons and external 
military forces during a NEO. There are three levels of permissiveness which, 
although not designed to be prescriptive, should be considered during the 
planning process. 
a. Permissive environment. No resistance to an evacuation is 
expected in a fully permissive environment. In such circumstances there 
will be host government consent and, most likely, host-nation support 
for the evacuation of those wishing to leave. Therefore, scheduled or 
chartered civil aircraft and shipping would be used if possible. Although 
military resources are unlikely to be required to provide security,8 they 
may be needed for logistic support, emergency medical treatment and 
transport. Military staff should monitor the situation closely and plan for 
a range of contingencies, including a deteriorating situation and descent 
into a less permissive environment. 
b. Uncertain environment. Under these circumstances, the host 
government is likely to have effective control of most of its security forces 
and is not expected to interfere with the conduct of a NEO. However, the 
host government may not have effective control of the territory and/or 
population in an area containing eligible persons. The level of host-nation 
7 Although sharing resources and the need for deconfliction will most likely occur in a 
multinational context (see paragraph 3.26 for more information).
8 There may be a requirement for certain security-related tasks to be carried out by the 
joint task force, for example, following a natural disaster where local security forces are no 
longer effective.
4
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
1
Context, characteristics and process

support may be affected by the environment. There may be irregular 
actors, armed or unarmed, organised or disorganised, that will create a 
climate of insecurity and a threat to eligible persons and the evacuating 
force. Planning for a NEO conducted in an uncertain environment must 
anticipate possible escalation to a hostile environment.
c. Hostile environment. A NEO conducted in a hostile environment 
would most commonly occur when either the host government: has 
lost control (or ceased to function altogether), resulting in a general 
breakdown in law and order; or is hostile to those countries conducting 
the NEO. Eligible persons and the evacuating force may be directly 
targeted, and their lives increasingly threatened. The host government’s 
security forces cannot be expected to support, and may even obstruct,  
a NEO.
1.6. Each NEO is likely to be unique in character. The context within which 
a NEO takes place will provide the information necessary for commanders 
to decide their force generation and planning options. How these different 
variables come together will determine the operating environment.9
Section 3 – Characteristics of a 
non-combatant evacuation operation
1.7. Speed of response. The national, regional and international political 
context and the unpredictable nature of a crisis can condense the period 
available to military forces to plan and execute a NEO.10 The constant 
monitoring of those countries at risk, regular reviews of diplomatic posts’11 
crisis management plans12 and any associated military contingency planning, 
all help to produce operational plans at short notice.13 
9 See Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations 
(with UK national elements) for information on operational analysis and planning.
10 Typically, an evacuation will start within 2–5 days of the request for a NEO being made. 
Defence Science and Technology Laboratory, The Historical Characteristics of NEO , 20 
December 2011.
11 A diplomatic post is a generic term for a His Majesty’s Government Embassy or High 
Commission located in a foreign country.
12 A crisis management plan is a plan (usually produced by the diplomatic post) that 
establishes a procedure for responding to a crisis, including the evacuation of eligible 
persons.
13 Such issues are addressed on a regular basis by the FCDO-led cross-government NEO 
working group.
5
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
1
Context, characteristics and process

1.8. Understanding. Paramount to any successful NEO is the level of 
understanding of the key destabilising factors within a country, along with a 
realistic assessment of future events.14 This level of scrutiny cannot be applied 
to every country, so an FCDO15/MOD agreed list of high-risk countries helps 
provide focus and direction. However, what cannot be mitigated against is 
the possibility that a previously ‘no-risk’ or ‘low-risk’ country degrades rapidly, 
leading to an urgent need for evacuation. The quick and efficient use of a 
MOD operational liaison and reconnaissance team (OLRT) 16 and a FCDO rapid 
deployment team17 will help develop an understanding of the crisis as it unfolds 
to support operational planning.18 
14 Further guidance on developing understanding is contained in Joint Doctrine 
Publication (JDP) 04, Understanding and Decision-making .
15 From the Crisis Management Department.
16 Information on the OLRT can be found at Chapter 4.
17 A rapid deployment team comprises FCDO personnel (typically up to eight) who remain 
at short notice to deploy to assist/augment a diplomatic post in a time of crisis. Typically, 
they deploy to airports and seaports to assist with processing of eligible persons. They 
may include representatives from the Border Force. The rapid deployment team is made 
up of FCDO staff who volunteer for this additional role. At a time of crisis they may choose 
not to deploy to a high-risk environment.
18 There may be other operational considerations beyond the NEO, such as a parallel 
response to a natural disaster.
© Reuters
6
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
1
Context, characteristics and process
Understanding the key destabilising factors within a country is paramount

1.9. Recognised eligible persons picture. Gaining clarity and information 
on the numbers and location of eligible persons requiring evacuation will be 
a priority for the planning community. A recognised eligible persons picture 
should be built and maintained for every country. As a crisis becomes 
increasingly imminent, the FCDO will endeavour to develop this picture; 
assisting this will be a recognised task for the OLRT. It will seldom be possible 
to provide absolute numbers and locations of eligible persons due to the:
• FCDO’s dependence on eligible persons making themselves known;
• constantly shifting numbers and locations of these eligible persons; 
• confusion about the eligibility of relatives and partners of British 
nationals; and
• FCDO’s limited ability to communicate in real time with eligible 
persons, many of whom may be tourists.
1.10. The recognised eligible persons picture and planning.  Early liaison 
between the FCDO, the MOD and high-profile eligible persons, will help 
to establish a common recognised eligible persons picture for coherent 
planning. This picture will be an essential planning tool and will form the 
basis of the scaling of force elements, which are then held at readiness. 
Much of the information that informs this picture is generated using electronic 
communications; in a crisis this electronic information may be unavailable 
or denied and this will impact on the speed and clarity of the recognised 
eligible persons picture. Seldom will the picture be wholly accurate, and it will 
likely become inaccurate very quickly as eligible persons leave the crisis area 
without notification. Eligible persons may also choose to remain in country 
and seek safety in their own homes, which will alter the scale of the potential 
NEO mission. Such anomalies may continue to influence decision-makers, 
especially when they are averse to taking risk. Decision-making could be 
affected until every eligible person is accounted for. 
1.11. An integrated approach. Early engagement between the FCDO and 
the MOD should help overcome potential misunderstandings over resource 
requirements and associated timelines. The decision to start integrating 
planning processes may originate from the FCDO, or it may be based on an 
independent assessment by the MOD. An FCDO/MOD service level agreement 
forms the basis to agree liaison mechanisms that support an integrated 
approach, including functions such as strategic communication. 
7
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
1
Context, characteristics and process

1.12. Multinational environment. Evacuating eligible persons is likely to take 
place in a multinational setting. Given this context, nations may decide to act 
unilaterally or as part of a multilateral response.19 Regardless, there is benefit 
from coordinating national plans at a time when the sudden demand for 
resources exceeds availability and to synchronise activity, for instance, flight 
plans into, and out of, the country of crisis.20 
1.13. Constraints. Resource constraints, both financial and the availability 
of assets, may affect the size, method and duration of the joint task force’s 
deployment. Political and legal constraints will shape the rules of engagement 
and are likely to limit the joint task force commander’s ability to use force, 
except in self-defence or in the defence of eligible persons.
1.14. Eligible persons’ perceptions. Only those eligible persons who wish to 
be relocated will be evacuated. Eligible persons who are non-residents of the 
country to be evacuated, such as tourists and those visiting on business, can 
be expected to leave early and are likely to want to be repatriated. Resident 
expatriates may be reluctant to abandon their homes and their livelihoods and 
may wish to be evacuated no further than is necessary, if at all. Similarly, if 
evacuated, they may want to return as soon as possible. Such unpredictability 
may affect the conduct of a timely and effective evacuation.
Section 4 – The process
Contingency planning
1.15. Contingency planning for possible evacuations will take place routinely 
for those countries most at risk. The MOD’s involvement in the planning process 
will be informed by the various UK government risk-management tools and 
the priorities agreed between the FCDO and the MOD. Contingency planning 
will help inform the in-country diplomatic post’s crisis management plan,21 
plus subsequent military planning. The crisis management plan details the 
measures needed to ensure the safety of eligible persons in the event of war, civil 
disturbance or natural disaster, including arrangements for their evacuation.
19 The UK may choose to respond with bilateral partners in countries or regions that are 
of interest to both parties. The Combined Joint Expeditionary Force, formed as a result of 
a bilateral agreement between the UK and France to tackle crisis situations, is one such 
organisation that falls into this category.
20 A coordination cell is a useful asset to help coordinate activity between multiple actors 
and is considered further in Chapter 3.
21 The content and maturity of a crisis management plan will vary from post to post and 
it will not contain the detailed planning information which would be held in a military joint 
contingency plan or joint planning guide.
8
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
1
Context, characteristics and process

The evacuation
1.16. Request for Ministry of Defence assets. In the first instance, the FCDO 
will prefer to evacuate all eligible persons through civil means.22 The MOD 
is likely to be requested to support an evacuation only when alternative civil 
options have been exhausted. This could be due to civil flights into the area of 
crisis being suspended or the hostile nature of the environment or because of 
the scale or urgency of the operation. The decision to deploy military assets 
to assist an evacuation is taken by the Defence Secretary in consultation with, 
and usually following a request from, the Foreign Secretary. Engagement 
between the MOD and FCDO should take place as soon as it is felt 
appropriate to support any potential transition between the use of commercial 
to military assets.
22 The first steps the FCDO would take would be changing country travel advice, which 
could then lead to an assisted departure or a civilian evacuation. Military support may still 
be provided, for example, planning support. © U.S. Marine Corps photo by Staff Sgt. Victor Mancilla
9
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
1
Context, characteristics and process
 The crisis management plan details the measures needed to ensure the safety of  
eligible persons in the event of war, civil disturbance or natural disaster

1.17. Requirement. The requirement of a NEO is to process eligible persons 
and then move them, possibly through several points, to a place of safety.23 
The requirement to screen those received for eligibility is an FCDO and Border 
Force function. Although each NEO is unique, the generic elements that make 
up the evacuation chain will remain largely the same.24 Figure 1.1 illustrates 
this process. The emphasis, however, should be on function rather than 
geography.
Figure 1.1 – The evacuation process
The evacuation chain
1.18. Eligible persons will enter the evacuation chain through either a 
reception centre, evacuation handling centre or at the point of embarkation, 
depending on their personal circumstances.25 The fluid nature of the 
23 For the purposes of this publication, the ‘processing’ of eligible persons is the function 
of establishing their eligibility for evacuation; this is an FCDO-led activity supported by the 
Border Force. The screening of eligible persons is the function of establishing that they do 
not present a threat to other eligible persons, staff or military forces. This can be an FCDO 
or military-led activity depending upon the threat assessment.
24 The UK approach is similar to that of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 
although the terminology used may differ slightly.
25 Further planning considerations for setting up an evacuation chain are provided in 
Annex 4A. 
10
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
1
Context, characteristics and process
Eligible person 
point of entry1
Place(s) of safety
Reception centre(s)
Evacuation handling 
centre(s)
Point of embarkation
Temporary safe 
location(s)
1.  In extremis, eligible persons may have to be collected from remote locations.

evacuation process means that plans must be agile enough to respond to 
the crisis while reflecting the needs of the eligible persons and the resources 
available. Not all stages of the evacuation chain will necessarily be used 
or activated. In particular, the use of reception centres and evacuation 
handling centres will depend upon the distribution of eligible persons and 
the accessibility of the point of embarkation. Stages in the chain may also be 
skipped or merged. For example, eligible persons could move directly from 
a reception centre to a point of embarkation or be processed at the point of 
embarkation. The various components of the evacuation chain are outlined in 
the following paragraphs.
1.19. Forward mounting base. A forward mounting base is a secure sea 
or land base from which an operation may be launched.26 It should have 
the capacity to manage an insertion force and subsequently handle logistic 
requirements and reserves. In many cases the forward mounting base will 
be in the same location as a place of safety, or a temporary safe location. 
The presence of eligible persons may place an additional burden on local 
infrastructure.
1.20. Forward operating base. A forward operating base is a base 
established within the joint operations area to support tactical operations. It will 
be resourced to provide minimum services, commensurate with sustaining the 
required level of effort.
1.21. Reception centre. Reception centres are pre-designated sites, 
selected by His Majesty’s Representative as part of a diplomatic post’s crisis 
management plan, where individuals can enter the evacuation chain. Although 
not often used, the reception centre can provide an initial screening and 
processing function when there is a need to concentrate eligible persons 
before onward movement. It can also be used where there is a particularly 
high threat of attack, in which case evacuees should be screened before 
group movement. Responsibility for the control and administration of reception 
centres lies with the FCDO, usually delegated to their in-country staff. His 
Majesty’s Representative may request military support in uncertain or hostile 
environments.
1.22. Evacuation handling centre. An evacuation handling centre is a 
temporary secure location free from the threat of destabilising influences. Here 
eligible persons are received and processed by FCDO/Border Force officials 
to establish their eligibility for evacuation. The location is jointly agreed by the 
26 Examples could include a port, an airfield or on board a ship.
11
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
1
Context, characteristics and process

FCDO and MOD. Its selection is predicated on both military considerations 
(for example, security and force protection) and the FCDO’s ability to provide 
temporary care for eligible persons and subsequently source onward means 
of travel to strategic transport hubs. The evacuation handling centre may be 
collocated with a point of embarkation. Depending on the prevailing security 
environment, military support may be required to secure an evacuation 
handling centre and provide convoy security to the point of embarkation.
1.23. Point of embarkation. The point of embarkation is a secure site with 
facilities permitting safe entry and exit for military transport. It is here that 
eligible persons arrive for military extraction to a temporary safe location or a 
place of safety.27 Once processing is complete and eligibility confirmed by the 
FCDO/Border Force (either at the reception centre, evacuation handling centre 
or, in some cases, the point of embarkation), functional responsibility for eligible 
persons is temporarily handed to the military.28 His Majesty’s Representative 
and the military commander have a joint responsibility for selecting and 
administering the point of embarkation. The military commander is unlikely to 
accept responsibility for any person until their eligibility has been established 
by the FCDO/Border Force.29 
1.24. Temporary safe location. The MOD may not be able to transport 
eligible persons as far as a designated place of safety because of resource or 
time constraints. Alternatively, a temporary safe location could be identified, 
where eligible persons are safe from threat and can await onward movement. 
Responsibility for eligible persons should be passed back from the military to 
the FCDO at the temporary safe location, from which the UK government will 
be able to arrange onward movement to a recognised place of safety.
1.25. Place of safety. A place of safety is where eligible persons exit 
the evacuation chain and are no longer reliant on diplomatic or military 
assistance.30 The place of safety should:
• be safe; 
27 Points of embarkation could include airports, harbours, beaches or alternative locations 
from which to transport eligible persons across a border to a temporary safe location or 
place of safety.
28 Responsibility for eligible persons may have to be passed to the military at an earlier 
point in the evacuation chain following agreement between the military commander and 
His Majesty’s Representative. The permissive nature of the environment and the availability 
of military resources will be among the factors that determine the exact location.
29 Responsibility is likely to be accepted in extreme circumstances.
30 If required, British nationals could still be assisted under standard consular terms for 
overseas assistance.
12
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
1
Context, characteristics and process

• have commercial accommodation; and 
• have functional regional or international transport links.
There may be several different places of safety depending on the situation and 
the needs of the eligible persons. The FCDO will nominate the place of safety 
and it is normally identified in the crisis management plan. It could exist in the 
country itself, a neighbouring country or, in exceptional cases, the UK.
1.26. Warden system. The warden system is a network of volunteers 
located in the country in crisis. Wardens act as a point of contact between His 
Majesty’s Representative and the wider community of resident eligible persons 
(not short-term visitors or tourists). Using a cascade system, the wardens pass 
on information and instructions to eligible persons as a crisis evolves. The 
effectiveness of the system can vary between countries and may not exist 
at all.
1.27 . Extraction of eligible persons. There may be occasions where eligible 
persons are unable to make their way to any part of the evacuation chain due 
to the hostile nature of the environment, their location or other unforeseen 
circumstances. In extreme circumstances, military forces may be required 
to extract eligible persons from their locations and move them to the point of 
embarkation or other suitable location.
13
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
1
Context, characteristics and process

 
Key points
• The UK government discharges its responsibilities for the safety and security 
of British nationals overseas through the FCDO. 
• Eligible persons will include British nationals and those individuals from other 
nations for whom the UK government and His Majesty’s Representative 
have accepted responsibility. 
• As a result of the inherent variance in national political thresholds for action 
and the potential speed of onset, NEOs are unlikely to be conducted as a 
multinational operation acting under a single headquarters.
• Depending on local government control and cooperation, and the influence 
and affinity of irregular actors, NEOs can occur in permissive, uncertain or 
hostile environments. 
• The national, regional and international political context and the 
unpredictable nature of crisis can condense the period available for military 
forces to plan and execute a NEO.
• Gaining clarity of the number of eligible persons requiring evacuation will be 
a priority for the planning community. This picture will often be opaque and 
may affect decision-makers’ risk calculus.
• The requirement of a NEO is to receive and process eligible persons and 
then move them, possibly through a number of points, to a place of safety.
• The location of the evacuation handling centre is jointly agreed between 
the FCDO and MOD. Its selection is predicated on both military factors and 
consular considerations. 
• Establishing eligibility to be evacuated is an FCDO-led activity, supported by 
the Border Force. 
• Eligible persons must be screened to ensure they do not present a threat to 
other eligible persons, staff or military forces. This is likely to be military-led 
activity but can be undertaken by FCDO staff depending upon the threat 
assessment.
14
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
1
Context, characteristics and process

Notes
15
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
1
Context, characteristics and process

[Page 26: No extractable text]

Chapter 2 describes the various roles and responsibilities 
of the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
and the Ministry of Defence. Moreover, it discusses how 
an inter-agency non-combatant evacuation operation is 
commanded and controlled.
Section 1 – Foreign, Commonwealth and Development  
                   Office and Ministry of Defence’s  
                   responsibilities and obligations  . . . . . . 19
Section 2 – Command and control  . . . . . . . . . . 21
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
17
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Chapter 2

Any evacuation in a crisis is likely to 
be a complex operation, moving, 
often unpredictably and at speed, 
through a number of different 
phases. A wide range of actions 
and actors need to be coordinated 
and sequenced.  
Review of the FCO Consular Evacuation 
Procedures, 2011 
”
“
18
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
2
Responsibilities and command and control

Chapter 2
Responsibilities and 
command and control
Section 1 – Foreign, Commonwealth 
and Development Office and Ministry 
of Defence’s responsibilities and 
obligations
2.1. The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) and 
Ministry of Defence (MOD) recognise that close cooperation, collaborative 
working and speed of response at all levels are essential to deliver an effective, 
efficient and timely evacuation. The respective responsibilities of the FCDO and 
MOD’s contribution are listed below.
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office responsibilities
Maintaining the crisis risk register to inform the non-combatant evacuation 
operation (NEO) priority countries list and the Cabinet Office countries at risk 
of instability matrix.31 
Requesting MOD assistance and obtaining the required approvals for 
planned military activity (both at Foreign Secretary and in-country levels). 
This could include routine contingency planning, or more short-term reactive 
assistance within compressed timescales.
Working closely with the appropriate UK representatives overseas, 
notably UK diplomatic posts, ensuring the timely preparation and routine 
maintenance of crisis management plans.
Updating travel advice32 and arranging call-handling facilities.
31 The priority countries list is agreed by the FCDO and the MOD.
32 Changing travel advice may provide an indicator as to the UK government’s intentions 
regarding a crisis, including an evacuation. 
19
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
2
Responsibilities and command and control

Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office responsibilities
Setting the overall information strategy in consultation with the Cabinet Office 
and other government departments. Managing the UK government’s press 
brief and cross-government ‘lines to take’.
Selecting reception centres and points of embarkation, taking into account 
military advice as necessary.33 
At the outset, determining (as far as possible and on a case-by-case 
basis) the numbers and locations of eligible persons, including by special 
agreement, nationals from other countries which the UK government agrees, 
or has agreed to assist.
Deciding on the level of consular support to be given to eligible persons and 
providing it, in concert with other government departments.
Selecting and running the evacuation handling centre (noting selection is a 
joint consideration with the MOD, which accounts for military factors).
Processing eligible persons up to and including the place of safety. This 
should include: establishing eligibility; consular screening; requesting 
immigration support where required; and producing and updating manifests 
of eligible persons.
Where practicable, and after consulting other government departments on 
what is reasonably feasible, reassuring UK allies and partners of the UK 
government’s wider support to their requests for assistance.
Liaison with the European Union and other friendly international partners 
to maintain visibility of partners’ contingency plans and agree special 
arrangements (for example, European Union lead state for the evacuation) in 
peacetime. At times of crisis, deconflict and, where required, coordinate, the 
UK evacuation operation with that of allies and partners.
Sending representatives from the FCDO and other government departments 
to MOD planning groups, current commitments team meetings and other 
relevant meetings as appropriate.
Assisting with burden sharing with allies and partners, overflight clearance, 
host-nation support, as well as visa and diplomatic bagging of specialist 
military equipment.
33 The FCDO may have pre-determined points of embarkation that have to be altered for a 
NEO following military advice. 
20
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
2
Responsibilities and command and control

Ministry of Defence contributions
Contingency planning for NEOs based on FCDO/MOD priority countries.
Extract eligible persons via an agreed military evacuation chain.
Contribute to the diplomatic posts’ resilience to assist maintaining critical 
core activities.34 
Assist British diplomatic posts’ activities in developing insight into the 
destabilising factors and influences in-country.
Reassure UK allies and partners by the demonstrable provision of support to 
their requests for assistance.
Contribute to the drafting, reviewing and exercising of crisis management 
plans at the diplomatic post.
Where necessary, protect eligible persons and FCDO staff during the 
evacuation process.
Where required, and with agreement of the FCDO representative, assume 
responsibility for running the evacuation handling centre.
Funding
2.2. Payment for NEOs will be in accordance with the current edition of  
Joint Service Publication (JSP) 462, Financial Management and Charging 
Policy Manual or a His Majesty’s Treasury instruction advising on the  
charging/payment of NEOs.
Section 2 – Command and control
2.3. His Majesty’s Representative will assume the role of crisis leader, 
responsible for the overall in-country UK government response to a crisis  
that requires an evacuation. In the UK, command is established under 
a gold, silver, bronze model, with an FCDO director or director general 
assuming the gold command. Gold command, in consultation with His 
Majesty’s Representative, is responsible for final decision-making on the UK 
34 Examples may include security, communications, command and control, and 
situational awareness support.
21
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition , Version 2 ) 
2
Responsibilities and command and control

government’s crisis response, subject to ministerial decisions where required. 
Silver command, reporting to the single gold command, is split between three 
silver managers: 
• consular (including evacuation operations, staff deployments 
to theatre, eligible person mapping, consular assistance and 
administration); 
• strategic communications (including media handling, situation 
reports, public and ministerial interface); and 
• political (including policy development and briefings). 
In an evacuation, the silver consular manager would lead on the evacuation 
operation, with significant decisions referred to the gold commander or 
ministers as required. 
2.4. Military in a subordinate and supporting role. FCDO primacy is a key 
feature of a NEO. It is important for the balance of responsibilities between 
military and diplomatic/civilian staffs to be understood fully when planning and 
executing an evacuation. 
2.5. Complexity. Coordination and liaison will probably be complex, 
frequently involving several other government departments and multinational 
actors. Depending on the host nation government’s degree of control, it may 
be necessary for a joint task force commander to establish direct liaison in 
separate areas of the host government, including the local security forces, 
airspace control and port authorities, as well as with commercial agencies and 
individual non-governmental organisations.
2.6. Military chain of command. The military chain of command is outlined 
below.
a. Within the policy determined by ministers, the Chief of the Defence 
Staff issues military strategic direction and appoints a joint commander 
and a joint task force commander.
b. The joint commander, usually the Chief of Joint Operations, will 
exercise operational command from the Permanent Joint Headquarters 
(PJHQ). The joint commander is responsible for directing, deploying, 
sustaining and recovering the joint task force.
22
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
2
Responsibilities and command and control

c. The joint task force commander will exercise operational control, 
usually from the joint task force headquarters deployed in the joint 
operations area. The joint task force commander is responsible for 
producing the campaign plan and conducting the NEO when ordered. 
In most NEOs, the joint task force headquarters will be formed from 
the Joint Force Headquarters, augmented as necessary. The size and 
location of this headquarters will depend on the situation. 
2.7. His Majesty’s Representative/joint task force commander relationship.  
Within the joint operations area the joint task force commander will be 
subordinate to His Majesty’s Representative, who is not in the military chain 
of command. The decision to evacuate will be made by the FCDO gold 
commander in London. His Majesty’s Representative will then coordinate the 
evacuation. Once evacuation has been approved, the decision to commit 
military forces lies with the joint task force commander. Whenever possible, 
either the joint task force commander, their deputy, or the Defence attaché 
should collocate with His Majesty’s Representative to ensure detailed 
coordination and development of both the diplomatic and military plans. The 
joint task force commander assumes responsibility for the military elements of 
the operation, in support of the gold commander’s intent, once the decision to 
evacuate by military means has been made.
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office primacy is a key feature of a  
non-combatant evacuation operation
23
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
2
Responsibilities and command and control

2.8. Tactical command. In NEOs where the scale, threat and complexity 
are limited, the joint task force commander may elect to exercise direct 
command over assigned forces using their staff in an appropriately configured 
joint task force headquarters. Where the NEO is more complex, perhaps 
with greater physical or political risk, component commanders may be 
employed. Component commanders should be identified early enough to 
contribute to the joint task force commander’s operational estimate. They 
should be intimately involved in the staffing of the plan. The designated military 
commander will use their own organic command and control structure, 
adapted as appropriate, to provide command and control for the evacuation 
process.
2.9. Advance force command and control. UK Armed Forces already 
deployed in theatre and operating under different command arrangements, 
such as forward deployed maritime platforms or military close protection, 
should normally be placed under operational command of the joint 
commander as soon as they have the means to command them. Local 
command arrangements must be established by PJHQ for UK advance forces 
operating in theatre prior to establishing the joint task force headquarters.
2.10. Multinational command. Precedent suggests that national interests 
mandate separate national operations which, where possible, have been 
coordinated with other states’ plans, rather than conducting a single 
multinational operation. If, however, a multinational response was the preferred 
course of action,35 then the ability to obtain unity of effort will be a key factor in 
a time-sensitive NEO.36 
35 An example would be the UK/France Combined Joint Expeditionary Force.
36 For further details read Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.4.2,  Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Non-combatant Evacuation Operations . 
24
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
2
Responsibilities and command and control

 
Key points 
• Close cooperation, collaborative working and speed of response at all levels 
are essential to deliver an effective, efficient and timely evacuation.
• FCDO primacy is a key feature of a NEO. The FCDO has a number of 
responsibilities that the MOD contributes to.
• His Majesty’s Representative will assume the role of crisis leader, 
responsible for the overall in-country UK government response to a crisis 
that requires an evacuation. 
• Within the joint operations area, the joint task force commander will be 
subordinate to His Majesty’s Representative. 
• The decision to evacuate will be made by the FCDO gold commander in 
London.
• The joint task force commander may elect to exercise direct command over 
assigned forces. Where the NEO is more complex, perhaps with greater 
physical or political risk, component commanders may be employed. These 
component commanders should be identified early enough to contribute to 
the joint task force commander’s operational estimate.
• UK Armed Forces already deployed in theatre and operating under different 
command arrangements should normally be placed under operational 
command of the joint commander as soon as they have the means to 
command them.
25
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
2
Responsibilities and command and control

[Page 36: No extractable text]

Chapter 3 explains what planning occurs at the strategic 
and operational levels. It describes how planning should 
take place with partners across government and several 
factors particular to a non-combatant evacuation operation. 
Annex 3A lists the key themes to be included in the 
operational estimate. Annex 3B describes the legal basis for 
a non-combatant evacuation operation. 
Section 1 – Diplomatic planning . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Section 2 – Military strategic planning . . . . . . . . . 31
Section 3 – Planning considerations . . . . . . . . . . 35
Section 4 – Forces   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Section 5 – Other agencies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50 
Annex 3A – Non-combatant evacuation operation  
                   planning guidance  . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Annex 3B – Legal issues and rules of engagement  . . 53
27
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Chapter 3

In matters of military contingency, 
the expected, precisely because it 
is expected, is not to be expected.  
Rationale: what we expect, we 
plan for; what we plan for we 
provide for, we thereby deter; 
what we deter does not happen. 
What does happen is what we 
do not deter, because we did not 
plan and provide for it, because 
we did not expect it.
Sir Michael Quinlan, Permanent Under 
Secretary, 1988–92”
“
28
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

Chapter 3
Planning
Section 1 – Diplomatic planning
3.1. Normally a non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO) is initiated 
in the final stage of the crisis management plan. Once started, the key to 
coordinating the crisis management plan and NEO activities is to identify 
when military action is needed on the ground to support an ongoing Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) evacuation.
3.2. Crisis management planning. All diplomatic posts should maintain a 
crisis management plan. This crisis management plan contains contingency 
plans for a broad spectrum of eventualities, one of which is the requirement 
to conduct a NEO. For crisis management planning purposes, diplomatic 
posts are designated high, medium or low risk, which will determine the extent 
of the plan and frequency of the crisis management plan review. The FCDO 
may request assistance from the Ministry of Defence (MOD) to contribute to 
the review process of the NEO element of the crisis management plan.37 The 
objectives of a crisis management plan are to: 
• ensure the safety and security of the British community in the event 
of a crisis;
• set out the risks posed to the British community; 
• set out diplomatic posts’ arrangements for responding to a crisis, 
including staff roles, eligible person estimates, warden networks and 
key contacts; and
• provide a basic framework for conducting an orderly evacuation of 
eligible persons by commercial or other means.
37 Reviews are normally supported by Joint Force Headquarters (JFHQ) based on 
priorities agreed between the MOD and the FCDO.
29
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

3.3. Implementation. His Majesty’s Representative is the authority for declaring 
the stages of the crisis management plan, in consultation with the FCDO, as the 
situation deteriorates. Crisis management plans are tailored according to each 
country’s situation and are largely based around four stages. The first stage 
usually starts after British nationals have been advised to avoid non-essential 
travel to the country concerned, but this is not a precondition for His Majesty’s 
Representative to enact all, or elements of a crisis management plan.
a. Stage 1. ‘Be alert and stay at home’. In this stage the community is 
advised to be alert and stay at home.
b. Stage 2. ‘Go unless there is an urgent need to stay’. Those 
who have no urgent need to remain are advised to leave by normal 
commercial transport. 
c. Stage 3. ‘Go’. Members of the community are advised to leave under 
their own arrangements, if commercial means still exist. 
d. Stage 4. ‘Evacuate’. Report to reception centres or elsewhere in 
the evacuation chain for evacuation under arrangements made by His 
Majesty’s Representative.38 If His Majesty’s Representative believes that 
the evacuation can be conducted without military support, evacuees will 
be instructed to report directly to a point of embarkation (usually a port or 
airfield) for onward movement by civil means. 
3.4. Closure of the diplomatic post. The decision to close the post will 
be taken by the gold commander in London having taken advice from His 
Majesty’s Representative, who will have considered the risks to the diplomatic 
staff. The actions required to affect an orderly closure of a diplomatic post are 
likely to impact on the conduct of a NEO. Diplomatic staff and resources will be 
required to prepare the diplomatic post for closure; some military assistance 
may be required. 
3.5. Transition to a military non-combatant evacuation operation. While 
civilian transport would almost certainly be used to evacuate eligible persons 
from a permissive environment and for onward movement from a point of 
embarkation, military assets would be required when civilian carriers: 
• become overwhelmed by the demand for spaces; 
38 In extremis conditions, eligible persons may have to be collected from their place of 
residence. 
30
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

• terminate the service for security reasons;
• cannot react quickly enough to provide the service; 
• are denied authority to land by the host nation; or
• are unable to support eligible persons with complex needs.
3.6. Liaison. When a NEO becomes a likely option, a Permanent Joint 
Headquarters (PJHQ) liaison officer or operational liaison and reconnaissance 
team (OLRT)39 should be deployed to act as a link between PJHQ, the joint 
task force commander and His Majesty’s Representative. The liaison function 
will help facilitate a transition from an evacuation based on commercial 
means to that which requires military assets. Although highly desirable, it 
may be impossible to insert the liaison officer or OLRT in uncertain or hostile 
conditions. Joint Force Headquarters (JFHQ) routinely nominate a duty liaison 
officer to the FCDO’s Crisis Management Department to facilitate collaboration 
and information flow between the MOD and the FCDO and will routinely visit 
both MOD (Security Policy and Operations) and FCDO as part of that duty. 
During periods of crisis, they will work alongside FCDO colleagues in King 
Charles Street, London. Depending upon the nature of the crisis, the MOD 
may enhance this liaison position to provide additional support to the FCDO. 
3.7. Operational military advice. If deployed, the following would be able to 
provide military advice to assist consular staff (in preparing or reviewing a crisis 
management plan) and His Majesty’s Representative (in making their decision 
to request a NEO):
• the Defence attaché;
• routine staff visits from PJHQ/JFHQ;
• a military intelligence liaison officer;
• special forces; and
• an OLRT.
Section 2 – Military strategic planning
3.8. Timelines. Timelines for planning, ministerial consideration and issuing 
directives can vary from hours to weeks. A NEO may be required to start 
soon after the political decision to commit forces, and as quickly as militarily 
39 The OLRT is drawn from the JFHQ.
31
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

practicable. On these occasions, the full planning process may have to be 
shortened.40 
3.9. Initiating the planning process. NEO planning can be initiated in 
isolation or as part of a wider operation. It may be undertaken in response 
to a crisis or as part of joint FCDO/MOD contingency planning. Regardless 
of context, planning begins in response to a request from the FCDO to the 
MOD; this can originate from several sources including the National Security 
Council or a specific diplomatic post. However, at some point all requests must 
be formalised by department-to-department correspondence, and usually 
authorised by Defence at ministerial level. There are two categories of planning. 
a. Crisis. Defence Crisis Management Organisation (DCMO) standard 
operating procedures detail the MOD’s crisis response process, 
including the level of interaction with the FCDO and other government 
departments. 
b. Steady state. The FCDO and MOD (Military Strategy and Plans) 
agree, develop and maintain a prioritised list of countries to focus NEO 
planning and monitoring. The prioritisation of planning is informed by 
the crisis risk register; the countries at risk of instability matrix; the watch 
list states; and trigger events identified in the FCDO’s flashpoints and 
Defence Intelligence indicators and warnings (I&W). 
The planning sequence
3.10. Military planning for a NEO should commence as soon as possible; the 
planning process will be informed by the National Security Council throughout 
the crisis. Where time and resources permit, daily coordination meetings 
are held in the FCDO bringing together all those departments and agencies 
involved in the crisis. The MOD crisis management planning process applies to 
NEOs in the same way as it does to any other operation. Although hierarchical, 
much of the planning sequence occurs concurrently as an iterative process 
with many steps overlapping. The planning process is outlined below.
3.11. In response to, or in anticipation of, a request for assistance from the 
FCDO, Military Strategy and Plans in the MOD will conduct a political/military 
estimate, informed by a current operations group and/or a strategic planning 
group, to confirm the viability and level of military assistance. Military Strategy 
and Plans should develop military options based on assessing all the factors, 
40 Strategic-level lessons identified from previous NEOs should be reviewed at the outset 
of crisis.
32
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

constraints and planning variables to inform and direct more detailed military 
planning activity. It may conclude that there is no role for the military. Military 
Strategy and Plans should include input from other government departments 
as required.
3.12. Concurrently, and if required, the DCMO will stand up a current 
commitments team in the MOD. This team will strategically manage the 
operation. Establishing the current commitments team will be preceded by a 
formal handover of the responsibility of operational planning between Military 
Strategy and Plans and Security Policy and Operations. The handover is 
normally triggered by a reduction in notice to move or actual deployment of UK 
force elements.
3.13. The output of the political/military estimate is a Chief of the Defence 
Staff’s (CDS’) planning directive, which is issued to PJHQ and the supporting 
commands to legitimise staff planning effort. The directive does not authorise 
any deployment at this stage (unless authorised separately by the MOD).
3.14. On receiving the planning directive, a contingency planning team will 
form up in PJHQ. In conjunction with the current commitments team, this 
team will conduct a military strategic estimate to establish a preferred course 
of action and develop a plan to cover directing, deploying, sustaining and 
recovering allocated forces. To ensure continuity, the JFHQ is also represented 
on the PJHQ contingency planning team.
3.15. A CDS directive, will be issued to the joint commander, once the 
course of action has been agreed by ministers. This directive will authorise the 
deployment of UK Armed Forces and will outline the area of operations. The 
joint commander will then issue their mission directive for the NEO, formally 
appointing the joint task force commander and confirming the constraints for 
the operation. The joint commander is responsible for deploying, sustaining 
and recovering the joint task force. Once the operation moves from planning to 
execution, the PJHQ contingency planning team will transition to an operations 
team. The basic composition of the team stays the same, but leadership 
changes from military plans (J5) to military operations (J3).
3.16. The joint task force commander and their staff will develop a concept 
of operations and the campaign plan. The supporting commands and Director 
Special Forces are an integral part of the planning process throughout. Much 
of the development of the campaign plan will require direct consultation and 
liaison with the FCDO. Concurrency of FCDO and MOD planning activities 
during a crisis is shown at Figure 3.1. 
33
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

Planning
Maintain
crisis 
management 
plan
Assessment
of crisis
Crisis management plan
Stage 1Stage 2Stage 3Stage 4
His Majesty’s 
representative
FCDO
agree
MOD
PJHQ/
JTFC
FCDO, CMD,
and MOD, SPO
horizon scan and
determine NEO 
planning priorities
FCDO
daily review 
drawing in 
MOD and OGDs
FCDO
request 
recce from 
MOD
SPO, supported by 
Defence Intelligence 
Services, monitor 
and direct PJHQ to 
conduct contingency 
planning where 
appropriate. Plans 
are maintained by 
PJHQ and JFHQ
FCDO
warn
MOD
FCDO/MOD
agree to initiate 
planning for a 
potential NEO
Deploy
rapid 
deployment 
team
MOD
assistance
required
Defence Crisis 
Management 
Organisation
stands up
current 
commitments 
team
CDS
planning
directiveDeploy
MILO,
OLRT, 
special 
forces
CDS
directive
NEO
approved
Forces
allocated
Form
contingency 
planning 
team
Joint
commander
directive
Joint task 
force 
commander
campaign
plan
Joint task 
force
deploy
FCDO
CDS Chief of the Defence Staff
CMD Crisis Management Department
FCDO Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Ofﬁce
JFHQ Joint Force Headquarters
MILO military intelligence liaison ofﬁcer
MOD Ministry of Defence
NEO  non-combatant evacuation operation
OGD other government department
OLRT operational liaison and 
 reconnaissance team
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
SPO Security Policy and Operations  
Figure 3.1 – UK planning and conduct of non-combatant evacuation operation
34
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

3.17. Military contingency plans. PJHQ, as instructed by the MOD, prepare 
and update contingency plans for NEOs. The level of detail contained in the 
plan will vary with the assessed likelihood of its use. In increasing level of detail, 
there are three types of plan.
a. Joint planning guide. Joint planning guides contain general 
planning data for a region or country, which can be used as the basis 
for more detailed planning during an emerging crisis. 
b. Joint contingency plan. Joint contingency plans contain detailed 
information on force requirements, deployment options, evacuation 
courses of action, readiness states and details of the recognised eligible 
persons picture, but this will require further detailed work as a crisis 
develops.
c. Operation plan. An operation plan contains sufficient detail for 
a specific operation to be conducted. Operation plans need to be 
frequently updated to remain current. As a result, they are restricted to 
operations that are likely to occur at very short notice. 
3.18. Defence profiles and intelligence briefing memoranda. Defence 
Intelligence produces a classified monthly I&W paper, which provides an 
analysis of recent events and an assessment on the risks of instability in the 
forthcoming six months. This paper must be considered in conjunction with 
the countries at risk of instability matrix. To assist with planning, Defence 
Intelligence will provide intelligence support on the location of a crisis and any 
potential transit routes. This intelligence support should include geospatial 
intelligence (including imagery) and multiple-source intelligence. Defence 
Intelligence will continually update their initial report with more detailed current 
intelligence as planning continues. 
Section 3 – Planning considerations
3.19. Non-combatant evacuation operation planning guidance. Annex 3A 
provides guidance that could be used to provide a common framework 
for planning and conducting NEOs. It also forms the basis of any dialogue 
between diplomats and military forces that must precede any successful NEO. 
35
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

3.20. Integrated planning. Joint analysis and assessment of the crisis will 
assist collective understanding and integrated planning. Liaison between 
the FCDO and the MOD should take place at the earliest opportunity. Once 
a NEO is activated, Security Policy and Operations (supported by PJHQ/
JFHQ) assumes the lead on engagement with the FCDO’s Crisis Management 
Department. 
Cross-government indicators and warnings
3.21. Operational experience has highlighted that a lack of common 
understanding between government departments surrounding I&W, and 
specifically the decision points and subsequent activity that should flow from 
them, can be a point of friction during planning. 
3.22. At the operational level, Defence continually maintains global 
intelligence-driven I&W aligned to military contingency plans.41 I&W should 
identify the factors that indicate the emergence of a crisis in any given country, 
which then drives additional capacity and resource to refine contingency 
plans. In the early stages of any overseas emergency it is unlikely the Crisis 
Management Department within FCDO will have the resources or capacity 
to develop detailed I&W with the same degree of maturity. Once a crisis has 
41 JFHQ J2 staff maintain I&W aligned to an internal intelligence product (referred to as the 
‘STARE’) that monitors the deterioration in governance across several countries of interest. 
As countries move further toward crisis, any change to the intelligence-driven I&W moves 
those countries closer to the centre, which drives activity to refine contingency plans.
36
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning
A NEO will likely be conducted under an intensive international media  
and diplomatic spotlight

been formally declared and the Crisis Management Department is augmented 
with additional staff from across FCDO, experience has demonstrated there 
is substantial benefit in sharing and refining I&W collaboratively alongside 
colleagues from the FCDO to foster greater common understanding and 
aligned responses. It is important to note that although common agreement on 
the I&W is extremely beneficial, the critical point is to agree the decision points 
and the subsequent activity that is driven by a change to the I&W which meet 
or exceed assigned thresholds. 
3.23. Military planners and colleagues from other government departments 
work to different authorities and the difference in tolerance of risk must be 
recognised as a reality. The key takeaway for military planners is to integrate 
and share products early to foster alignment on I&W, and then agree key 
decision points and the subsequent activity that will flow from this. 
Communication considerations
3.24. Strategic communication. Before any NEO operation, Military Strategic 
Effects will articulate the desired strategic communication effects in the 
Strategic Communication Actions and Effects Framework (SCAEF) which, in 
conjunction with Military Strategic Effects’ full spectrum targeting directive, 
enables the commander to understand the strategic objectives, authorities and 
permitted use of capabilities.
3.25. Information operations. Information operations (Info Ops) is defined 
as: a staff function to analyse, plan, assess and integrate information 
activities to create desired effects on the will, understanding and capability 
of adversaries, potential adversaries and audiences in support of mission 
objectives.42 A NEO will likely be conducted under an intensive international 
media and diplomatic spotlight. Understanding the information environment 
for the area of responsibility, but also more widely the area of interest, will 
therefore be essential to communicating coherently within the broader SCAEF. 
Commanders must consider that every action will have a cognitive effect 
and therefore all use of capabilities must be analysed, planned, executed 
and assessed from an Info Ops perspective. There are number of focused 
information capabilities that are fundamental in a NEO.
a. Media operations. Info Ops, supported by media operations, will 
define the audiences to be targeted and the joint task force should be 
42 NATOTerm. See Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information 
Operations (with UK national elements).
37
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

prepared to support news media coverage as well as managing the UK 
government’s demand for information. Within a NEO the following media 
tasks should be considered.
 o Develop a media plan using the guidance given from the FCDO’s 
news department.
 o Confirm how the FCDO will manage the social media interface 
for news of, and communicating with, the eligible person 
community, including during evacuation operations.
 o Understand non-governmental organisations ‘information 
spheres’ such as Reuters’ AlertNet, United States Global Disaster 
Information Network and the United Nations (UN) Relief Web.
 o Determine appropriate lines to take on high profile eligible 
persons and any associated sensitive issues (in accordance with 
FCDO guidance).
 o Plan for the need to protect and evacuate the accredited press.
 o Be prepared and equipped to collect and transmit compelling 
media content of NEO operations.
 o Be prepared to undertake media interviews whilst deployed with 
media-trained talking heads.
b. Information activities. In conjunction with Info Ops, understanding 
the existing communications infrastructure available will enable 
psychological operations to be planned and executed to facilitate the 
NEO. Within a NEO, products are most likely to be disseminated and 
acknowledged by the sponsor. Likely tasks would be:
 o explaining the purpose of the joint task force action to counter 
disinformation, confusion and rumour;
 o assisting the FCDO in establishing control of eligible persons’ 
community to minimise casualties and to prevent interference 
with the evacuation; and
38
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

 o deterring adversaries from initiating actions detrimental to 
the interests of the UK, the FCDO or the conduct of military 
operations.
c. Electromagnetic warfare. Electromagnetic warfare assets can be 
used to disrupt hostile communication and support friendly information 
activities. Any disruptive activity must balance the opportunity against 
the impact it may have on the task force’s ability to communicate with 
eligible persons, partners across government and allies.
Multinational force considerations  
3.26. There are additional issues to be considered when planning and 
conducting a NEO in a multinational context. These are listed in the 
paragraphs below.43 
a. Coordination between all the foreign and defence ministries and 
military headquarters of those nations involved. 
b. Coordination of different national evacuation plans where 
appropriate or necessary, ranging from sharing resources (including 
transportation and niche capabilities such as joint personnel recovery) 
and collocating evacuation nodal points (such as an evacuation 
handling centre or the point of embarkation) to a fully integrated 
response. Mechanisms to coordinate resources could involve using a 
NEO coordination cell (NEOCC).
c. The selection of high-grade officers, with appropriate language 
skills, for staff and liaison functions to coordinate plans with other 
national contingents, the host nation and other civilian agencies.
d. The selection of forward mounting bases, forward operating 
bases, reception centres, evacuation handling centres, temporary safe 
locations, places of safety, joint task force headquarters and NEOCC 
sites may be influenced by a partner nation’s military and consular 
intentions.
43 AJP-3.4.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Non-combatant Evacuation Operations provides 
operational-level guidance for North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)-led multinational NEOs. 
39
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

3.27 . Non-combatant evacuation operation coordination cell. At the point 
of executing a NEO it is very unlikely the UK will be acting independently and 
several other nations are likely to be extracting their own eligible personnel at 
the same time. In such circumstances, it is highly likely a NEOCC44 or similar 
multinational coordination centre (MNCC), as used in Kabul in 2021, will 
be established. Operational experience indicates that having a strong core 
coordination staff can be invaluable in reducing tactical friction in a highly 
charged and complex environment and can also coordinate and maximise 
the use of international resources for mutual benefit. The UK’s consideration 
to lead (as it has previously done in NEOs from Libya and Afghanistan) or 
participate within a NEOCC should be addressed early in planning as it will 
likely require political endorsement.45 
44 The NEOCC concept was initiated by the NEO Coordination Group (NCG), a group 
comprising around 16 member nations, independent of NATO and the European Union. The 
UK is a member of the NCG with representatives from JFHQ and British Forces Cyprus.
45 Full details of the NCG and NEOCC can be obtained through the NCG terms of 
reference, held by JFHQ.
Non-combatant evacuation operation coordination 
centre – resource deconfliction
The competition for commercial transport assets is likely to be fierce in 
times of crisis. Formal groupings, such as the NEO Coordination Group 
(NCG) allow for sharing assets through its NEOCC. This cell should be 
established upon the execution of a NEO or a military assisted evacuation 
operation to provide a means for partnering nations to share information 
and assets for the collective success of evacuating eligible persons. The 
principal role of this cell is to act as a non-executive multinational liaison 
cell, operating to each nation’s own national chain of command. It also 
coordinates both effort and assets to where they are most needed during 
an evacuation. The precondition for establishing a NEOCC would be a bid 
from a NCG full member who has volunteered to establish the NEOCC and 
assume the role of lead nation. Typically, this is the country that has the 
largest eligible person community in the affected region. 45
Example of a non-combatant evacuation operation  
coordination centre – Libya 2011. A NEOCC was established in the British 
High Commission in Malta hosting representatives from 16 different nations. 
The cell helped coordinate the evacuation of 458 British nationals and 1170 
of our partners’ nationals on British military assets, and 202 British nationals 
on our partners’ military assets.
40
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

Other considerations
3.28. Legal issues and rules of engagement. Annex 3B covers the legal 
issues of NEOs and how rules of engagement are developed. It reinforces that 
states have a right to exercise individual, or collective, national self-defence 
under international law. It also remains the commander’s responsibility to 
make sure that only the degree of force that is necessary, reasonable and 
proportionate in the circumstances is used. Ultimately, the commander 
must keep in mind, in all but the most exceptional circumstances, the overall 
objective of any force used is to enable the safe extraction of eligible persons. 
3.29. Force protection and operations security. Planners considering force 
protection are likely to find the issue compounded by the nature of a NEO. 
Widely published evacuation plans will inevitably provide any hostile actors  
with the information necessary to plan focused attacks against eligible persons 
or the joint task force. Information freely available to the community and  
hostile actors could include details of the locations for sites where eligible 
persons will congregate, or where helicopters will be used to extract eligible 
persons. Where civilian or military air transport is to be used, planners should 
consider providing air transport security measures to protect the aircraft 
from sabotage or hijack.46 Consequently, NEO planners will have to consider 
active measures to mitigate the risk to personnel across large sections of the 
evacuation process.
3.30. Protective measures. Planners should consider eligible persons’ lack 
of training and protective equipment as well as other factors (such as health 
and age) that could increase their susceptibility to harm during the evacuation. 
Further considerations should be given to the inherent risks of using military 
assets, such as helicopters, ships or aircraft. 
3.31. Communication and information systems. The MOD controls the 
allocation of strategic satellite communications resources. PJHQ conducts 
communications planning, based on direction from the MOD.
a. Prior to deploying the joint task force headquarters, the MOD will 
have to consider, and if necessary authorise, any FCDO requests for 
communications assistance to His Majesty’s Representative. PJHQ J6 
(Communication and Information Systems (CIS)) staff will be required 
to liaise with the FCDO to agree the communications between the 
46 More detail on force protection can be found in AJP-3.14, Allied Joint Doctrine for Force 
Protection.
41
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

diplomatic post and the deployed force. Similar liaison will be required 
for the joint task force headquarters J6 (CIS) staff, when deployed.
b. The joint task force headquarters will require the appropriate CIS 
to provide appropriate links to other multinational forces (if applicable) 
and trunk connectivity to deployed UK components/unit headquarters 
in theatre.
3.32. Joint personnel recovery. Recent NEOs have identified the need 
for joint personnel recovery in an uncertain or hostile NEO environment. To 
achieve this, the joint task force commander may establish a joint rescue 
coordination centre to plan and coordinate joint personnel recovery and 
medical evacuation missions with other nations involved in the crisis or located 
within the crisis region.47 Advice regarding force protection may be necessary, 
specifically on the need for aircraft defensive aid suites.
Anticipating surge in evacuation interest from eligible persons 
3.33. There is an inherent tension within any NEO scenario where those 
who are eligible for evacuation under the UK government’s criteria may be 
resistant to evacuation while the environment remains relatively permissive. 
Despite graduated advice from the FCDO to evacuate, eligible persons may 
be extremely reluctant to leave due to fears over: security of personal property 
and business premises; leaving family members who they perceive as ineligible 
for evacuation; and professional reputation. It is only when the situation 
has deteriorated to an extent that it presents a clear and present danger to 
individual security that people may be willing to evacuate, at which point any 
evacuation will invariably require military assistance due to the deterioration in 
the security environment.
3.34. As a result, despite persistent messaging advising UK nationals to 
leave, FCDO, Border Force and military staff should anticipate a surge in 
eligible persons seeking evacuation at the point of crisis and/or the point at 
which an evacuation with military support is initiated. This tendency may be 
particularly significant, and difficult to manage, where assistance programmes 
are already in place, such as in Afghanistan 2021.
3.35. It is imperative that the eligibility criteria for evacuation is clear and well 
understood by those at the lowest tactical levels who will invariably form the 
initial security screen. Eligibility criteria used on any previous NEO deployment 
47 For further detail see AJP-3.7, Allied Joint Doctrine for Recovery of Personnel in a 
Hostile Environment.
42
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

will not be applicable. Any confusion or misinterpretation in eligibility criteria at 
the policy or operational levels will be magnified and cause significant friction 
at the tactical level. Furthermore, to maintain high processing rates, it may be 
necessary for military personnel to reinforce FCDO and Border Force staff to 
assist in conducting eligibility checks at the evacuation handling centre.
3.36. It is important to note the military have no role in establishing the criteria 
for eligibility to be evacuated. Criteria for eligibility is set at ministerial level and 
implemented by Home Office (Border Force) staff on the ground along with 
FCDO colleagues. Military personnel may be requested to assist with eligibility 
screening at the evacuation handling centre to maintain high processing rates, 
but they are to only apply the criteria set by the Home Office. The primary role 
of the military is to provide initial security screening of all personnel prior to 
their assessment by Border Force and/or FCDO colleagues.   
3.37. Waivers and dispensations. Recent NEOs in Afghanistan (2021) and 
Sudan (2023) have demonstrated that the tactical situation can deteriorate 
quickly and military personnel may be required to operate beyond the limits 
of current operational policy, which requires swift submission and approval 
of waivers and/or dispensations through the appropriate authorities. Planners 
should understand the limits of operational policies and the specific process 
and authorities through which waivers and/or dispensations are submitted for 
approval.48 In many instances, operational waivers may take significant time to 
be approved and therefore common areas that may require the submission of 
waivers and/or dispensations should be identified early in planning. Common 
areas for the consideration of waivers and dispensations include: 
• approval for troops (and dogs) to fly in fighting order;49
• dispensation to load cargo, civilians and troops on the same flight; 
• approval to exceed policy limits on the number of aircraft 
passengers; and 
• a waiver to fly without certain dangerous goods checks. 
48 PJHQ J9 can advise on the process of submitting operational waivers and/or 
dispensations and should be engaged as early as possible to identify specific policies that 
may require waivers if the security environment deteriorates.
49 Fighting order is a term used mainly by ground troops to describe the minimum 
equipment the individual requires to operate immediately in a hostile environment. It is 
sometimes referred to as combat equipment fighting order (CEFO) or troops in fighting trim 
(TIFT) depending upon the Service but generally describes the individual having webbing, 
body armour and combat helmet, weapon, ammunition and communications equipment 
(with batteries at 100% charge) on the person.
43
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

Section 4 – Forces
3.38. Force generation. NEO forces are likely to be generated from two 
sources. First, those that can be activated at short notice with the means to 
move to the crisis area at speed. Secondly, those already in the vicinity by 
chance or design. Suitable forces may include those assigned to the joint 
force50 or those deployed on operations or exercise near the affected region.51 
3.39. Readiness. Planners must take account of the readiness preparation 
time required for the joint task force. Readiness preparation time includes 
the notice to move, deployment time and any training required in the joint 
operations area prior to the joint task force being ready to conduct operations. 
Time is usually at a premium for NEOs requiring rapidly deployable or forward 
deployed forces held at very high readiness.
3.40. Notice to move. The MOD’s Security Policy and Operations is 
the authority for promulgating ‘notice to move’ for all military assets. Early 
agreement to reduce notice, redeploying key units, advance sailing of ships 
(and associated aircraft) and recovering Royal Air Force (RAF) air transport 
aircraft may be essential for the timely implementation of an evacuation plan. 
3.41. Operational reserve. An operational reserve52 should be formally 
designated from the outset to mitigate risks presented by dependencies on 
other nations. Depending on the scale of the NEO, the operational reserve may 
be drawn from forces beyond those held at very high readiness and therefore 
early planning (and warning) is imperative. Early consideration should also be 
given to operational agility and forward basing operational reserve forces close 
to the country in question using either Defence regional hub locations  
and/or partner or allied nations. Both may require additional diplomatic 
clearances that will take time and it is therefore essential that the permissions 
required to forward base operational reserve forces are considered early in the 
planning for a NEO.
50 The joint force incorporates maritime, land, air, special forces and logistic forces with 
a wide range of capabilities and are held at various levels of notice to move ranging from 
24 hours to 30 days. 
51 NEOs are usually conducted using light troops, special forces and helicopters. Defence 
Science and Technology Laboratory, The Historical Characteristics of NEO , 20 December 
2011.
52 Additional forces under the command of the principal Joint Commander (Commander 
Joint Operations), or their nominated Joint Task Force Commander. This force is separate 
from any other reserve forces held at the tactical and theatre level by the tactical 
commander and supported component commander respectively.
44
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

Operation Pitting – Kabul, 2021 
During the NEO conducted from Kabul in August 2021, British 
forces drawn largely from 16 Air Assault Brigade did not deploy with 
sufficient mass to secure the entire Hamid Karzai International Airport (HKIA), 
and specifically the main runway, which was subject to repeated incursion, 
thereby placing the entire multinational operation at risk. HKIA was eventually 
secured by forces from the United States (US) 82nd Airborne Division 
following a deliberate overnight clearance operation. This critical dependency 
not only required close liaison with US ground forces to minimise tactical 
friction but also meant UK Armed Forces did not control all the principal 
elements required to continue the operation. As in Kabul, dependencies can 
be successfully managed through close liaison and established relationships 
with other nations, but, wherever possible, critical dependencies should be 
mitigated through the employment of an operational reserve.   
Capability requirements
3.42. The composition of the joint task force will depend on the likely military 
tasks and the situation in the joint operations area. As well as command and 
control, the capabilities required will include some, or all, of the following and 
need to be reflected in the task organisation.
3.43. Strategic lift. The strategic estimate will have included a risk assessment 
that determined the number of transport assets required to extract the eligible 
persons. Appropriate platforms will also be required to deploy personnel, 
vehicles, equipment and stores to and from the joint operations area.
© The Insider Paper (via Twitter)
45
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition , Version 2 ) 
3
Planning

3.44. Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. NEOs often occur 
in areas where availability of dedicated intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance (ISR) is limited. Consequently, as well as dedicated UK and 
foreign-partner assets, fusing and disseminating information from other 
sources (such as open-source intelligence, diplomatic reporting or liaison 
with host nation’s security forces) will be necessary. ISR assets are tasked 
in accordance with the joint task force commander’s direction. Therefore, 
close coordination is vital to ensure priorities are met with scarce resources. 
Processing and disseminating information is often a key constraint rather 
than the ability to collect it. Deploying intelligence personnel should be 
considered when the NEO is likely to be for a protracted period to provide 
current intelligence on the localised threats. During the execution of the NEO, 
ISR supports both intelligence priorities and tactical activity, such as tracking 
eligible persons. 
3.45. Fire support. Though NEOs are generally defensive in nature, a strong 
deterrent posture will often contribute to success, especially in uncertain or 
hostile environments. Thus, a suitable level of offensive capability may be 
required that may include using fire support for close protection tasks as 
well as providing extended security to the evacuation chain.53 Equally, the 
mission and rules of engagement may dictate the deployment of non-lethal 
weapons. Whatever lethal and non-lethal effects are created by the joint force, 
they are likely to be carefully studied by observers, both within the area of 
operations, domestically in the UK and internationally; this level of scrutiny, and 
its associated impact on the operation, will need to be considered early in the 
planning process.
3.46. Force protection. The requirement for force protection is likely to be 
paramount once the initial insertion of the military force is complete. Force 
elements such as infantry, combat support elements and defensive maritime and 
air assets may be required to protect: His Majesty’s Representative; designated 
very important persons and critical resources; consular staff assisting with the 
evacuation; eligible persons; and transport assets, such as air transport.
3.47. Manoeuvre. At the operational level, maritime and air manoeuvre 
elements may be required to provide over-the-horizon deterrent activities. 
Tactical manoeuvre elements may be required to outflank and/or coerce 
any potential opposition to guarantee mobility and, when necessary, provide 
counter-mobility resources.
53 For example, the US Marine Corps’ use of AH-1W Cobra attack helicopters in the 1991 
US Embassy evacuation in Mogadishu. 
46
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

3.48. Control of the electromagnetic spectrum. Control of the 
electromagnetic spectrum for offensive and defensive purposes can give  
the NEO force considerable advantage over any potential adversary. In a 
complex emergency there may be other military forces and civilian agencies  
all competing with the host nation, one another (through purchasing 
bandwidth/satellite communications channels) and warring factions for space 
on the electromagnetic spectrum. Most of these forces and agencies will be 
outside the control of the NEO force. This will greatly complicate managing and 
protecting the electromagnetic spectrum for the joint task force’s use. Liaison 
and the subsequent coordination of the electromagnetic spectrum should take 
place where appropriate. In a non-permissive environment, electromagnetic 
warfare resources may be required to disrupt opposition forces.
3.49. Medical. The capability of medical support needs to be considered at 
the earliest possible stage when planning a NEO. It should aim to support the 
health needs of both deployed personnel and eligible persons and be capable  
of providing appropriate treatment and care during the evacuation. See 
Chapter 5 for more detail.
47
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning
The strategic estimate will have included a risk assessment that determined the number  
of transport assets required to extract the eligible persons

3.50. Sustainability. A NEO will normally be of short duration, thus minimising 
the sustainability requirements of the force. However, the requirements 
of His Majesty’s Representative’s staff and other eligible persons may be 
considerable. Certain evacuees, such as pregnant women, nursing mothers, 
the elderly and young children, may also have specific requirements. 
Sustainability planning for the eligible persons must be conducted for all 
phases of the operation until they are in a temporary safe location or place of 
safety and no longer part of the NEO. The potential requirement for sweep-up 
operations to evacuate stragglers and other residual eligible persons should 
also be noted.
Section 5 – Other agencies
3.51. The United Nations, international organisations and 
non-governmental organisations. There may be several international 
organisations and non-governmental organisations within the joint operations 
area. The UN, other international organisations and larger non-governmental 
organisations will generally have their own evacuation plans. However, there 
may also be many small independent non-governmental organisations with no 
contingency plans. In an uncertain or hostile environment, the UN Department 
of Safety and Security may deploy additional security staff to develop and 
coordinate the evacuation of UN staff and the humanitarian community at 
large. Alternatively, they may become eligible persons for military evacuation. 
3.52. The European Union. The European Union (EU) civil protection 
mechanism covers the evacuation of EU citizens. EU countries are responsible 
for the evacuation of all EU nationals. 
3.53. The commercial sector. Major multinational companies operating in 
country will frequently have their own security arrangements and evacuation 
plans; these arrangements often include the use of private security companies. 
These multinational and private security companies will have good local 
contacts and are likely to be well-resourced with communications and 
transport assets. There is also likely to be many eligible persons who will 
work for medium or smaller companies that will not have their own evacuation 
plans and be dependent upon the UK government’s assistance. Information 
regarding UK company plans should be incorporated in the diplomatic post’s 
crisis management plan.
48
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

3.54. Liaison with other agencies. The FCDO will take the lead, assisted 
by other government departments as required, in international liaison with 
other agency headquarters located in the crisis area. Deconfliction is essential 
to avoid numerous organisations competing for the same resources and 
evacuation routes. Early coordination with other organisations is desirable 
to achieve a degree of coherence between different organisations through 
sharing information, resources and plans. As a minimum, an understanding  
of each other’s plans is essential to avoid confusion and unnecessary 
duplication. Military staff should be prepared to conduct liaison early in the 
planning process. 
49
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3
Planning

 
Key points
• His Majesty’s Representative is the authority for declaring the stages of the 
crisis management plan. His Majesty’s Representative may decide that an 
evacuation can be conducted without military support.
• When a NEO becomes a likely option, a PJHQ liaison officer or OLRT should 
be deployed to act as a link between PJHQ, the joint task force commander 
and His Majesty’s Representative.
• Once a NEO is activated, Security Policy and Operations (supported by 
PJHQ/JFHQ) assumes the lead on engagement with the FCDO’s Crisis 
Management Department.
• A NEO will likely be conducted in a congested operational area. 
Deconfliction and coordination with multinational forces, non-governmental 
and transnational organisations, the commercial sector and other parties will 
require early liaison and robust communication channels.
• Media and information operations must be aligned with the overall strategic 
communication plan.
• NEOs are very likely to be multinational endeavours as several nations 
scramble to evacuate their citizens. Early consideration should be given to 
the UK playing a prominent role within any form of NEOCC or multinational 
coordination centre.  
• At the point at which an evacuation with military support is initiated there is 
likely to be a surge in those seeking evacuation, which must be managed at 
the evacuation handling centre.
• The military has no role in establishing eligibility criteria for evacuation – it is 
a Home Office responsibility, exercised through FCDO and Border Force 
staff. However, eligibility criteria must be clear and widely understood as 
any confusion or misinterpretation at the policy and operational levels will be 
magnified at the tactical level where it can cause significant friction.
• An operational reserve should be formally designated from the outset to 
mitigate risks presented by dependencies on other nations.
50
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3
Planning

Annex 3A
Non-combatant 
evacuation operation 
planning guidance
3A.1. Military Strategy and Plans’ political/military estimate will inform the 
Chief of the Defence Staff’s planning directive. The operational estimate 
(conducted in conjunction with other government departments where possible) 
will seek to bring clarity in the key themes listed below.54 
Current situation
• The international, regional and local political context.
• Actors involved.
• Any influencing factors.
• Supporting assets available (host nation, international organisations,  
   non-governmental and commercial organisations).
• The in-country political, security and social framework.
• Identifying deployed UK assets in the region of crisis.
• The worst-case scenario.
UK interests and priorities
• Our foreign policy.
• Any standing arrangements, commitments or obligations to other nations.
UK government strategy (ends)
• Our national intent/objectives.
• Decisive conditions for Defence’s contribution to the evacuation.
• A risk analysis.
• Any constraints.
54 NEO planning guidance notes supplement AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning 
of Operations (with UK national elements).
51
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3A
Planning

Implications for the Ministry of Defence (ways/means)
• What military strategic effects are sought? 
• Any multinational/agency involvement, for example, North Atlantic Treaty  
   Organization (NATO), UN, Combined Joint Expeditionary Force.
• The military planning options.
• Course of action generation.
• A risk analysis.
• The commander’s critical information requirements.
Presentational issues
• The UK’s, coalition or international will.
• The UK (domestic) and international perception of the NEO.
• The impact of ‘do nothing’.
• Any subsequent crisis-related issues.
52
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3A
Planning

Annex 3B
Legal issues and rules of 
engagement
Legal basis for a non-combatant evacuation operation
3B.1. The conduct of all military operations, including NEOs, is circumscribed 
by the provisions of national and international law. National law includes both 
the criminal law of the UK, to which our UK Armed Forces are always subject 
wherever they are serving, and the law of the particular country to which a 
force may be deployed, subject to any immunity granted by a status of forces 
agreement or memorandum of understanding.
3B.2. States have a right to exercise individual or collective national 
self-defence under international law in respect of their own nationals at risk of 
death or serious harm in a foreign state where the state authorities involved 
are incapable of protecting them (Article 51 of the UN Charter). The legal 
justification for our Armed Forces to enter another state to rescue eligible 
persons may arise in different ways. 
a. Explicit permission to enter for extraction purposes may be given 
by the receiving state authorities and in certain circumstances a status 
of forces agreement may even be concluded.
b. Where there has been a breakdown in law and order and a 
coherent government no longer exists (or where such government 
exists but it is unable or unwilling to protect British nationals) 
intervention to evacuate British nationals may be justified on the 
grounds of national self-defence (Article 51 of the UN Charter).
c. A UN Security Council resolution.
3B.3. In these circumstances, the use of force will be limited to what is 
necessary and proportionate for accomplishing the mission and the defence  
of UK Armed Forces and evacuees. Rules of engagement (ROE) will be drafted 
accordingly. 
53
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3B
Planning

Rules of engagement development
3B.4. Ministers provide political direction and guidance to commanders 
through ROE that control all provocative actions including, but not limited to, 
the application of force by our Armed Forces and the conduct of information 
operations and so on. For our national operations, those ROE will be 
developed in accordance with Joint Service Publication (JSP) 398, United 
Kingdom Manual of National Rules of Engagement. They will reflect the 
legal basis of the operation and the UK government’s political and military 
objectives. They will be designed to ensure that any action or application of 
force is carefully controlled. ROE are not intended to be used to assign specific 
tasks or as a means of issuing tactical instructions.
3B.5. In a multinational NEO, our Armed Forces will operate under UK 
national ROE. Every effort should be made to ensure that the various national 
ROE are aligned. Established procedures exist for providing ROE within NATO 
as laid down in Military Council (MC) 362/1.
3B.6. The ROE for an operation will be developed in accordance with the 
procedures set out in JSP 398. These procedures should ensure that the 
initial profile is realistic according to the circumstances at the time. Once 
approved by ministers, the profile will be attached to the joint commander’s 
mission directive. Upon receipt of that directive, commanders should review 
the profile to evaluate its impact on their conduct of operations. Proposals 
for change should be submitted to the issuing authority and copied to the 
Ministry of Defence in the form of a ROE request (ROEREQ) message. A full 
justification for each requested rule change must be given along with the likely 
consequences of the requested rule being refused. The approval process will 
be similar to the original authorisation process.
Self-defence
3 B.7. The rights of individual Service personnel to use force in their own 
self-defence is inherent and may not be restricted by any ROE. UK law requires 
that only reasonable force may be used to defend oneself or others from an 
act carrying an actual or an imminent threat of harm. Use of lethal force in 
self-defence is only justified where there is an actual or imminent threat to 
human life, and there is no other way to eliminate the threat other than by the 
use of potentially lethal force.
54
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
3B
Planning

Rules of engagement implementation
3B.8. When implementing ROE, commanders must consider the authorised 
profile as the limit of permissions available. In their judgement of the situation 
they may authorise a more restrictive version of any rule. It is important that 
ROE are disseminated to the lowest appropriate level as quickly as possible 
and in a form that is readily understood. 
3B.9. ROE do not by themselves guarantee the lawfulness of any action. It 
remains the commander’s responsibility in law to ensure that only the degree 
of force that is necessary, reasonable and proportionate in the circumstances 
is used. 
55
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
3B
Planning

[Page 66: No extractable text]

Chapter 4
Chapter 4 describes the phases of a non-combatant 
evacuation operation. Annex 4A describes the key 
characteristics of the staging posts within an evacuation 
chain.
Section 1 – Phase 0: Shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Section 2 – Phase 1: Deployment . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Section 3 – Phase 2: Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Section 4 – Phase 3: Recovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Annex 4A – Considerations for setting up the  
                   evacuation chain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
57
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 

”
“I am truly grateful for the 
dedication and professionalism of 
the men and women of our armed 
forces who have evacuated 
more than 2,000 people from 
Sudan from over 20 countries 
and continue to provide medical 
and humanitarian support from 
Port Sudan. ... Their efforts are a 
source of national pride.
Ben Wallace MP , Secretary of State for 
Defence, 4 May 2023
58
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

Chapter 4 
Implementing a 
non-combatant 
evacuation operation
Section 1 – Phase 0: Shape
4.1. The nature of crises means that, in many cases, the state of Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) and Ministry of Defence 
(MOD) preparations may oscillate through periods of heightened or reduced 
alertness many times before a non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO) is 
finally required. This could include reviewing plans, building and maintaining 
situational awareness, and providing security and protection for those in 
country. Throughout this period, shaping operations, coherent with the 
prevailing circumstances, will be conducted. This may well involve activity in 
countries where conditions of violence and austerity exist as part of a normal 
pattern of life. So, shaping operations are as much a part of a NEO as any 
eventual evacuation. 
4.2. Ministry of Defence/Foreign, Commonwealth and Development 
Office linkages. Throughout the strategic and operational planning processes, 
the MOD will maintain regular dialogue with the FCDO Crisis Management 
Department. As a crisis develops, the balance of military engagement with the 
Crisis Management Department will adjust to become more focused on the 
joint task force commander. Permanent links between the Crisis Management 
Department and Joint Force Headquarters (JFHQ) (the preferred NEO joint 
task force headquarters framework) should be maintained to ensure that the 
transition of focused activity is seamless.
4.3. Operational liaison and reconnaissance team. The principal means 
to gather information for the joint task force commander and their staff to 
develop and maintain individual and shared situational awareness is an 
operational liaison and reconnaissance team (OLRT) drawn from the JFHQ. 
The OLRT members are specialist military planners, trained for work in 
crisis environments and with experience in working in a cross-government 
environment. The OLRT provides a rapid, guaranteed and continuous link 
59
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

between His Majesty’s Representative, the joint task force commander and 
the joint commander. An OLRT often deploys in civilian clothes, and by civilian 
means, to avoid local sensitivities. The composition of the team is scalable to 
meet the task at hand. Principal tasks for the team include the following.
a. Brief. A briefing to His Majesty’s Representative on the conduct of a 
NEO, the likely forces involved and the military considerations.
b. Liaise. Liaise with the diplomatic post staff, the Defence attaché, 
host nation military, and other nations’ military deployed in theatre.
c. Review. Review the crisis management plan and coordinate it with 
military plans as necessary.
d. Plan. Commence the operations planning process on behalf of the 
joint task force commander.
e. Inform. Compile local information not otherwise available to update 
or inform contingency plans. His Majesty’s Representatives often find 
that in a deteriorating situation their normal methods of maintaining 
situational awareness become strained and the use of an OLRT is a 
significant enhancement to their capabilities.
f. Communicate. Provide communications equipment at the diplomatic 
post, or elsewhere, if needed.
4.4. Close protection. Should there be a risk to the His Majesty’s 
Representatives, their staff and/or the diplomatic posts, close protection may 
be requested. 
Section 2 – Phase 1: Deployment
4.5. In most cases, carefully applying resources during the shape phase will 
allow the judicious and timely deployment of forces so that, at the point a NEO 
is requested, the joint task force commander can assist. However, this may not 
always be the case. In some circumstances, the military response may have to 
be conducted in considerable haste and at reach. Here, the dialogue between 
the MOD, the FCDO Crisis Management Department, the joint task force 
commander and His Majesty’s Representative will be crucial to ensure that 
eligible persons are given the best possible guidance for their safety and timely 
60
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

evacuation. The joint task force commander may find they are forced to deploy 
with their headquarters while the preliminary moves are being made. Even 
with only a short transit, the pace of events may be rapid. The risk of losing 
situational awareness is significant. Also, the requirement for a robust method 
of conducting an update before force elements are placed under command 
is paramount. Where it has not been possible to poise an evacuation force, 
there will undoubtedly be additional political and media pressures with which 
the joint task force commander and His Majesty’s Representative will have to 
contend. 
4.6. Basing and commanding. The selection of the forward mounting base 
and joint task force headquarters location forms a key first step in the joint task 
force commander’s concept of operations. There may have been considerable 
activity in the shaping phase to identify, and agree, suitable locations. It is 
not uncommon for several forward mounting base or forward operating base 
options to be developed to allow agility when a NEO is executed. The joint task 
force commander will need to consider the following factors.
a. Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office regional 
facilities. As the supporting commander to the FCDO, the joint task 
force commander may need to align their location to that of the FCDO. 
Regional consular hubs may offer more staff to help process eligible 
persons, facilities to command from, and a nodal point from which to 
maintain situational awareness. Agreement will need to be secured  
with FCDO London for any forward military operations that may use 
embassy sites.
b. Multinational partners. So long as capacity and infrastructure 
allows, the most efficient coordination between nations will often be 
achieved by selecting a common location to command and base 
operations. In some instances, where a partner has greater regional 
influence than the UK, this may also enable smoother negotiation of 
access, basing and overflight with the host nations. Where capacity  
is limited, it may still be possible to select a common headquarters 
location while forces are dispersed to several forward operating bases  
in close proximity.
c. Internal or external locations. A forward mounting base/joint 
task force headquarters location outside the country from which the 
NEO is to be conducted generally offers easier access and a reduced 
requirement for force protection in rear areas. However, a forward 
61
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

mounting base within the country may become a viable option if security 
permits, possibly enabling better situational awareness.
d. Infrastructure. The force elements required to conduct a NEO often 
require considerable strategic lift to deploy, and substantial sustainment 
once in theatre. The availability of a functional infrastructure can 
considerably ease these burdens. In some cases, this might be available 
from an overseas UK base such as Gibraltar or Cyprus, although the 
joint task force commander may have to balance the benefits of such 
locations with their proximity to the NEO and their ability to command 
the operation.
e. Sea basing. In some circumstances, access or infrastructure may 
preclude the selection of a suitable land location. With enough warning 
time, sea basing may be a suitable alternative. While it is possible to 
both command and base from afloat, the joint task force commander 
will need to consider their ability to maintain situational awareness  
and/or operate within a multinational environment. This may not be so 
easily assured afloat as from a land base. Where there is a high risk of 
a NEO enduring for a prolonged period without execution, afloat basing 
may offer the ability to poise without the complications of a protracted 
military footprint ashore.
Section 3 – Phase 2: Execution 
4.7. The focus of this phase is the safe and swift evacuation of eligible 
persons to a place of safety. This may be enabled by a rapid insertion and 
withdrawal of military and FCDO personnel. 
4.8. The point at which the NEO commences is invariably a matter of careful 
judgement by the FCDO, in collaboration with the MOD and the joint task force 
commander, having assessed the: 
• risk to eligible persons; 
• political, coalition and environmental factors; and 
• readiness of the force. 
Ideally, His Majesty’s Representative will order the NEO to start once they are 
content that the evacuation handling centre is secure and ready to process 
personnel, and that the means of evacuating eligible persons is available. 
62
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

4.9. Before beginning the evacuation, the joint task force commander and 
His Majesty’s Representative must agree the point when eligible persons 
will enter the military evacuation chain and when they will exit again. In many 
cases, this will have been pre-planned but must still be considered against the 
prevailing circumstances. A detailed description of the associated tactical-level 
considerations for a generic evacuation chain is at Annex 4A, although specific 
circumstances will require bespoke solutions.55 
4.10. Once received into the evacuation chain, eligible persons are processed 
by the FCDO rapid deployment team/Border Force to ensure eligibility. It may 
be that FCDO/Border Force processing cannot be safely conducted before 
evacuation. In these circumstances, a further agreement with the joint task 
force commander will empower evacuating forces to make basic eligibility 
checks before accepting evacuees. The FCDO/Border Force will conduct 
more thorough checks at the place of safety or temporary safe location. During 
processing, it may also be possible to debrief evacuees (either using military or 
FCDO teams) to generate further understanding of the situation, especially the 
recognised eligible person picture.
55 Not all stages of the evacuation chain will necessarily be used or activated; stages in 
the chain may also be skipped or merged depending on the situation.
63
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation
A UK government official escorts civilians feeling Khartoum in Sudan to a waiting  
Royal Air Force A400M aircraft during Operation Polarbear in 2023

4.11. In a multinational evacuation, the additional allied evacuees will place 
considerable extra complexity to the recognised eligible person picture. The 
joint task force commander will need to be responsive to the dynamic political 
situation in which their obligations may grow quickly, often initially without 
clarity of the tactical implications. The formation of a NEO coordination cell will 
assist this process. 
Section 4 – Phase 3: Recovery
4.12. As with the deployment phase, the timing of recovery, either partial or 
complete, will be a careful judgement in which the joint task force commander 
and His Majesty’s Representative will be instrumental in advising the FCDO, 
who will make the final decision. It is almost certain that, even with the 
careful tracking of eligible persons, there will be some potential evacuees 
unaccounted for at the end of the main evacuation effort. A tactical pause may 
be appropriate to allow time for any remaining eligible persons to be identified 
and a second wave of extraction may be required (perhaps with a reduced 
force) before final recovery is ordered. Equally, a careful assessment of the 
multinational effort, and residual UK obligations to it, will be required to ensure 
that the consequences of UK departure are fully understood.
64
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

 
Key points
• As a crisis develops, the balance of military engagement with the FCDO 
Crisis Management Department will adjust to become more focused on the 
joint task force commander.
• The OLRT is the principal military capability by which early situational 
awareness and liaison is achieved. 
• Often time and opportunity to preposition forces will be scarce and 
operations will be conducted at reach. The risk of losing situational 
awareness during this phase is high. Maintaining dialogue between the joint 
task force commander, the FCDO Crisis Management Department and His 
Majesty’s Representative is crucial during this period of flux.
• The point at which the NEO commences is invariably a matter of careful 
judgement by the FCDO and is made in collaboration with partners. 
• Before beginning the evacuation, the joint task force commander and His 
Majesty’s Representative must agree the point when eligible persons will 
enter the military evacuation chain and when they will exit again. 
• In a multinational evacuation, the additional allied evacuees will place 
considerable extra complexity to the recognised eligible person picture. The 
formation of a NEO coordination cell will assist this process.
• It is almost certain that, even with the careful tracking of eligible persons, 
there will be some potential evacuees unaccounted for at the end of the 
main evacuation effort. A tactical pause may be appropriate to allow time 
for any remaining eligible persons to be identified and a second wave of 
extraction may be required before final recovery is ordered. 
65
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

Annex 4A
Considerations for setting 
up the evacuation chain
Reception centre
4A.1. Characteristics. Reception centres should be accessible, recognisable, 
preferably secure and close to the eligible persons’ communities. They should 
be familiar to eligible persons and easy for untrained civilians to find at night 
and under difficult conditions. The location and significant aspects of each 
reception centre should be detailed in the diplomatic post’s crisis management 
plan. Typical reception centres will use buildings such as expatriate clubs, 
hotels or offices. There is an inherent risk that reception centres may need 
protection. Where this cannot be provided, it is often more appropriate to not 
use reception centres but instead to instruct eligible persons to report directly 
to an evacuation handling centre or the point of embarkation.
4A.2. Responsibilities. His Majesty’s Representative is responsible for 
selecting reception centres, considering military advice as necessary. They are 
responsible for ensuring that each eligible person knows where the nearest 
reception centres is, and how long it will remain open for. His Majesty’s 
Representative will likely employ the warden system, alongside existing 
FCDO staff to facilitate this communication. His Majesty’s Representative’s 
responsibility for administering the reception centres is normally delegated to a 
warden.56 
4A.3. Activity. When called forward by His Majesty’s Representative, eligible 
persons make their own way to their allocated reception centres where they 
are gathered by the local warden (if available), assisted by diplomatic staff 
and military personnel.57 The FCDO appointed staff managing the reception 
centre should have a nominal roll of those eligible persons expected to report 
to their reception centres and initial screening will take place if possible. At a 
56 The extent of warden networks varies from country to country. Some countries have 
well-established warden networks which could administer reception centres, some 
countries have no warden networks at all.
57 Assuming they have been requested and that the appropriate legal framework (for 
example, status of forces agreement or memorandum of understanding) has been agreed 
with the host nation.
66
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

prearranged time, or on call, the FCDO appointed staff will close the reception 
centres and escort eligible persons to the nearest evacuation handling 
centre, using eligible persons’ own transport and/or transport arranged by 
His Majesty’s Representative. Although not a military responsibility, it may be 
necessary for the military to escort eligible persons from reception centres to 
the point of embarkation to ensure safe passage.
Evacuation handling centre
4A.4. Characteristics. The primary purpose of the evacuation handling 
centre is to organise the onward movement of the eligible persons to the 
point of embarkation, a place of safety or temporary safe location. It will also 
provide a screening facility to ensure that only eligible persons are moved. The 
evacuation handling centre will have the administrative arrangements needed 
to provide adequate medical and logistic support to eligible persons. It should 
be of sufficient size to handle the expected number of eligible persons, offer 
shelter and basic sanitation facilities and enable the processing of eligible 
persons. Typical buildings used for housing an evacuation handling centre 
are embassies, hotels, schools, airport cargo sheds, offices, expatriate clubs 
and sports clubs, but it may be that an open space with temporary shelter is 
acceptable.
4A.5. Location. The location of the evacuation handling centre will be 
dictated by the specific circumstances of the NEO. However, it is most likely 
to be located at a secure port or airport in an area where the urgency of the 
evacuation will not be compromised by the screening process. The selection 
of the evacuation handling centre is a joint FCDO and MOD responsibility, 
which must account for military factors (for example, security, force protection 
and logistics) during early planning and may override consular considerations 
depending on the threat assessment. The evacuation handling centre could 
be collocated with the forward mounting base or forward operating base. It 
could be located in the country being evacuated, situated in another country 
or afloat. The advantages and disadvantages of each of these options are 
described below.
a. In the country being evacuated. The main advantage of locating 
the evacuation handling centre in the affected country is that the 
accidental evacuation of non-entitled personnel can be avoided. 
This is the most attractive option in a benign environment. However, 
security, administration and time may be factors that may make this 
option unfeasible.
67
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

b. In another country. The two main advantages of placing the 
evacuation handling centre in another country are those of security 
and ease of administration, especially for the FCDO team, which 
may not consist of many personnel. The main disadvantage is the 
danger of accidental evacuation of non-eligible persons into a country 
that then subsequently refuses to accept them. In the event that an 
evacuation handling centre is to be located in another country, the 
acceptance of risk by His Majesty’s Representative will form part of the 
dialogue they have with the joint task force commander.
c. Afloat. Many of the functions of the evacuation handling centre 
could be carried out in a sea base. Sea basing may be required where 
there is no suitable land location for an evacuation handling centre, 
especially in a hasty NEO with small numbers of eligible persons. The 
benefits of force protection are particularly evident when sea based. 
It also has the advantage of simple administration for small numbers. 
The joint task force commander must balance these advantages 
against the risk of non-eligible persons entering the evacuation chain 
and must be conversant with the rules regarding temporary refuge. 58 
Should the evacuation handling centre be on board a Royal Navy or 
Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship, responsibility for processing eligible persons 
will rest with the ship’s commanding officer.
4A.6. FCDO responsibilities. The FCDO is responsible for:
• establishing and running the evacuation handling centre;59 
• screening potential eligible persons and establishing an order of 
priority; and
• coordinating the use of facilities, customs requirements, security, 
transportation and accommodation. 
4A .7. Military tasks. The joint task force’s primary duties include:
• controlling transport arriving from the reception centres;
• maintaining order in the evacuation handling centre;
• supporting the FCDO’s efforts to care for evacuees; 
58 See Royal Navy’s Book of Reference (BRd) 3012, Handbook on the Law of Maritime 
Operations, Chapter 3, Protection of Persons and Property at Sea.
59 Noting the location must be mutually agreed with MOD planners to account for military 
considerations. 
68
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

• providing security, administrative and logistic support to enable 
an evacuation, if requested by the FCDO and sufficient resources 
exist; and
• where required, and with agreement of the FCDO representative, 
assume responsibility for running the evacuation handling centre.
4A.8. Factors. When the FCDO establishes an evacuation handling centre, 
there are several factors that must be considered. These factors include:
• the origin and numbers of the FCDO personnel to staff the 
evacuation handling centre;
• the requirement for multinational coordination at the evacuation 
handling centre;
• when sited in another country, the willingness of the host nation to 
host the evacuees;
• logistic support available, including accommodation; 
• security;
• military advice on the location, should there be military involvement;
• access and egress via vehicle, public transport or by foot; and
• proximity to emergency helicopter landing site or loading point.
4A.9. Procedures during processing. During processing, the procedures 
to follow will depend on the location of the evacuation handling centre and 
the FCDO’s wishes. Regardless of location, a comprehensive plan for the 
reception and care of eligible persons should be implemented by the FCDO, 
taking into account the ethnic and cultural diversity of the eligible persons’ 
community. The evacuation handling centre should be staffed with security, 
interpreters (if possible), local immigration, diplomatic post support, and liaison 
and medical personnel. With advice from the MOD, the FCDO should consider 
the following factors. 
• Using military police to maintain order; this may well be a 
prerequisite, but careful consideration should be given since action 
by the host nation’s security services may well have contributed to 
the degradation of security. 
• Using easily recognisable markings on UK personnel, vehicles and 
equipment.
• Disarming eligible persons prior to evacuation processing.60 
60 Consideration should be given to any UK policy that allows eligible persons to travel 
with weapons.
69
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

• Debriefing eligible persons to generate and exploit information, that 
may eventually lead to a greater understanding of the overall eligible 
persons picture.
• Establishing a policy concerning the joint task forces’ responsibility 
to secure eligible persons’ valuables during processing.
• Providing interpreters at control sites.
• Following initial screening, using tags for visual identification.
• The requirement for searching women, children and disabled  
and/or injured; this may include providing male and female 
searchers.
• The presence of a chaplain, if available.
• Organising eligible persons to establish a single point of contact 
between the eligible persons group and the joint task force.
• The health status of eligible persons (for example, ongoing 
treatment, pregnancy, reliance or availability of medicines).
4A.10. Minimum processing requirements. If there is a concern for the 
protection and safety of eligible persons and the joint task force, a streamlined 
process will be adopted. All eligible persons will be screened for verification of 
identity and documentation before being prioritised for onward movement. In 
general, persons with life threatening medical problems will be processed first.
Eligibility checks and processing capacity 
4A.11.  Under normal circumstances, staff from the FCDO (supported by 
staff from the Border Force) will conduct all eligibility checks at the evacuation 
handling centre. These checks can take considerable time to identify and 
process eligible persons entitled to evacuation by the UK government. 
Operational experience has demonstrated that if processing capacity becomes 
an issue, either through a deterioration in the security environment and/or a 
substantial increase in applicants beyond capacity then the Home Office could 
70
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

conduct checks at the temporary safe location or even upon arrival in the UK.61 
It should be acknowledged that any decision to delay or suspend eligibility 
checks beyond the evacuation handling centre may have considerable 
second-order consequences for both the Home Office and FCDO,62 and 
therefore all options to improve processing capacity within the evacuation 
handling centre should be exhausted before this decision is considered.  
4A.12. Home Office waiving of eligibility checks will require ministerial 
approval and it is therefore prudent to establish these parameters in the 
early planning stages in conjunction with colleagues from other government 
departments. The critical tactical consideration is to ensure processing 
eligible persons does not become a choke point and that high outflow can be 
maintained throughout.63 
Evacuation handling centre layout
4A.13. On arrival at the evacuation handling centre, the evacuation handling 
centre staff assume control of the evacuees. If eligible persons arrive without 
having earlier passed through a reception centre, processing teams should 
verify their identity and eligibility for evacuation prior to allowing the eligible 
61 To ensure UK border security is not compromised, the authority to suspend or 
delay eligibility checks beyond the evacuation handling centre is held at ministerial level 
and would be applied for through the Border Force National Command Centre or the 
nominated Border Force gold commander. Any secondary diplomatic issues connected to 
the decision to conduct eligibility checks at the temporary safe location will be addressed 
through FCDO engagement. The in-place military force will continue to conduct security 
checks for all civilian personnel selected for onward evacuation.
62 For example, it could result in significant numbers of people arriving in the UK with 
no right of entry creating substantial long-term legal issues, and the FCDO having to 
renegotiate the use of a temporary safe location.
63 The crucial importance of maintaining high processing rates at the evacuation handling 
centre was highlighted by the tactical and operational commanders in the post -operation 
reports from Operation Pitting (Afghanistan, 2021) and Operation Polarbear (Sudan, 2023).
71
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation
A thorough understanding of NEO doctrine throughout the  
Rapid Extraction Task Force along with detailed rehearsals  
allowed for dynamic configuration of the evacuation handling  
centre taps, in order to maintain security and tempo whilst 
regulating flow to deal with surges.
Op POLARBEAR – 40 Commando Royal Marines  
Post Operation Report, 12 June 2023
“

persons to enter the evacuation handling centre. The facility is controlled by an 
evacuation handling centre control centre. It has three main areas, a: reception 
area; registration and medical area; and holding area. 
4A.14. Evacuation handling centre control centre. The evacuation handling 
centre control centre will plan, organise and supervise the running of the 
evacuation handling centre. Under overall FCDO leadership, staffing by 
diplomatic and military personnel will reflect the division of responsibility within 
the evacuation handling centre. The control centre will also maintain liaison 
with local authorities and other agencies.
4A.15. Reception area. This is the point at which eligible persons first 
enter the evacuation handling centre. It is important that eligible persons feel 
safe and reassured from the outset. In some cases, they will be in a state of 
shock and possibly have experienced bereavement. Particular consideration 
should be given to women, girls and boys who may have been subjected to 
gender-based violence.64 In all instances, firm but compassionate treatment 
is essential. This is also the point at which onward destinations are resolved. 
This can be difficult and cause considerable distress and commotion. It is, 
therefore, desirable that the reception area is physically separated from the 
registration and holding areas. The reception area has certain requirements.
a. Drop-off point. Providing signs and diagrams will help evacuees to 
understand the procedures and routines they are to follow. This should 
be reinforced with guides or personnel whose role it is to provide 
information and assurance. The injured and sick will be moved directly 
to the medical area and eligibility checked there if necessary. The 
physically able will be directed to a screening/search area. In certain 
circumstances, for example, in the event of an evacuation following a 
humanitarian disaster, blankets, food and drink will be required while 
people await screening. 
b. Screening/search area. Ideally, screening should take place as 
early in the evacuation process as possible to identify and remove 
non-eligible persons. The longer non-eligible persons remain within the 
system, the more difficult it will be to remove them. Force protection 
issues should be considered during the screening process in regions 
where there may be threats to the eligible persons or the joint task 
force. Diplomatic staff and male and female searchers, who will 
64 Further details can be found in Joint Service Publication (JSP) 1325, Human Security in 
Military Operations .
72
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

probably be Service personnel, will be required to carry out personnel/
baggage searches. This is the point when eligible persons should 
be marked to prove eligibility. Typically, this is achieved by using tags 
cards.
c. Provision for special needs. The reception facility must be able to 
cater for eligible persons who have special needs, such as bereaved 
or disabled persons. This is personnel intensive, but it is important 
that some form of reserve is ready to deal with any unexpected 
circumstances. Wherever possible, eligible persons with these needs 
should be allocated suitable guides.
d. Movement control. Airstrips, landing sites, beach or jetty, traffic 
circuit and vehicle parking areas should be identified, marked, 
manned and equipped as required. If the evacuation handling centre 
is collocated with the point of embarkation (for example, an airport or 
seaport), detailed arrangements for controlling the arrival of military 
transport will need to be established with local air traffic control or 
harbour authorities.
e. Repayment. In some circumstances, such as when using 
commercial transport, the FCDO or diplomatic staff may require 
eligible persons to repay the costs of evacuation to the UK 
government. Eligible persons may resent this, particularly if they are 
not in a stable financial position. 
4A.16. Registration and medical area. It is important not to duplicate effort 
between the reception and registration areas. Nonetheless, there is likely to 
be a need for considerable clerical and information technology support to the 
evacuation handling centre. 
a. Registration. Eligible persons’ personal details will be recorded 
on a registration sheet and their tag cards completed. Essential details 
include name, nationality, sex, age, passport number and contact 
details so that eligibility can be proven against UK records. In general, 
personnel who have arrived at the evacuation handling centre together 
should be kept in a group. If possible, families must not be separated.
b. Medical. The medical facility provides assessment and essential 
medical treatment required before onward movement. Medical 
personnel will identify serious medical cases that must be prioritised 
73
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

for the earliest suitable evacuation and request prompt completion 
of their processing. Medical personnel should ideally wear distinctive 
clothing or markings to aid identification. Medical personnel can 
advise evacuation handling centre personnel on health risks and any 
protection measures required.
4A .17. Holding area. After registration, eligible persons will be taken to a 
holding area. Sanitation suitable for the number of expected eligible persons 
will be required. The intention should be to move eligible persons from the 
holding area to the point of embarkation for onward movement as quickly and 
efficiently as possible. 
Secondary/reserve locations
4A.18. Secondary or reserve evacuation handling centres should be identified 
early in planning so they can be quickly used if the primary evacuation 
handling centre becomes unfeasible (either due to capacity issues and/or  
insecurity), or if specific groups of evacuees require segregation prior to 
evacuation. The selection of a secondary or reserve evacuation handling 
centre remains a joint task between the FCDO and MOD but, again, one that 
must account for military factors during early planning, which may override 
consular considerations (for example, security, force protection and logistics) 
depending on the prevailing security situation. 
4A.19. Operating a secondary evacuation handling centre will require 
substantial additional resources (time, security, personnel and materiel) and 
therefore must be considered early and resourced appropriately.
4A.20. Air transit. Prior to embarkation onto aircraft there will be a 
requirement to conduct searches for threats, dangerous air cargo and 
contraband in accordance with International Civil Aviation Organization 
standards. Moreover, it is likely that there will be a requirement to provide air 
transport security escorts on any military transport aircraft.
Temporary safe location or place of safety 
4A.21. The number and types of places of safety will vary according to the 
circumstances of each NEO and the eligible persons. For eligible persons 
who are just visiting, such as tourists, it is probable that they will evacuate by 
commercial means before a military evacuation is initiated. For eligible persons 
who were residents of the evacuated country, an internal place of safety 
74
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation

may be most appropriate, such as a hotel in an unaffected area. For eligible 
persons who are resident elsewhere, a place of safety may be repatriation to 
their country of origin. 
4A.22. Overall planning responsibility for a temporary safe location (including 
selection and designation) rests with the FCDO as they retain greater regional 
influence and the diplomatic relations necessary to secure the required access 
and permissions (such as basing and overflight). However, military planners 
must be central to this decision (which should occur during the shaping 
phase) due to the range of interconnected military considerations that must be 
addressed (for example, threat assessment, force protection and logistic plans) 
– indeed, tactical considerations may override consular issues out of necessity. 
4A.23. Potential locations that may have been preselected in a permissive 
environment may no longer be viable if the security situation has deteriorated 
significantly and therefore all options should be assessed against the prevailing 
security environment. 
4A.24. Operational experience has highlighted that the evacuation handling 
centre and the temporary safe location may well, respectively, represent the 
tactical and operational centres of gravity throughout the operation 65 and 
should be resourced appropriately.
4A.25. It will be rare that the military will be asked, or will be able to resource, 
the movement of eligible persons to a place of safety beyond the affected 
country or the immediate region. In these circumstances, it may be necessary 
to identify a temporary safe location where responsibility for the eligible 
persons can be passed back from the joint task force commander to the 
FCDO to coordinate their onward movement. 
65 Op PITTING Defence Operational Capability Assessment 06/21 , published September 
2022.
75
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
4A
Implementing a non-combatant evacuation operation
The evacuation handling centre and the temporary safe  
location may well, respectively, represent the tactical and operational 
centres of gravity.
“

[Page 86: No extractable text]

Chapter 5 provides guidance on both logistic and medical 
considerations necessary for a successful non-combatant 
evacuation operation.
Section 1 – Logistics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Section 2 – Medical  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
77
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Chapter 5

An agile and fast-moving reverse 
logistics chain, built  
against a collapsing timeline, was 
critical to the success of  
both aspects of the mission.
 
Operation PITTING – 16 Air Assault Brigade 
Post Operation Report, 26 August 2021 
”
“
78
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
5
Service support

Chapter 5
Service support
Section 1 – Logistics
5.1. Each non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO) is likely to be different 
and therefore the service support requirements will vary accordingly. Joint 
Doctrine Publication (JDP) 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations provides the 
overarching concepts for service support, set within the context-specific 
requirements of any evacuation. Logistic considerations are likely to be critical 
in the operations planning process. They will influence and shape the potential 
courses of action for the NEO. Because every operation will be different, 
planners will also have to consider:
• eligible persons’ support requirements;
• coalition partnerships and interaction with non-partner nations;
• availability of strategic and tactical sea/airlift;66 and
• constraints brought by access, basing and overflight permissions.
5.2. Logistic command and control. The joint task force headquarters will 
centrally control the relatively small force typically deployed for a NEO. It is 
unlikely that a NEO will be required to deploy a separate logistics command 
and control node.67 The joint task force headquarters J4 (Logistics) may need 
to be augmented to provide: 
• a logistic focus for the enablers within single-Service force packages; 
• operational-level logistic direction; and 
• governance across the joint support area.
5.3. Project. NEOs are characterised by the requirement to project a force 
rapidly. Refining the force element table is critical to achieve the correct 
balance of assigned forces, including enablers. It is unlikely that maritime 
support will have the ability to react within the required timescales if projected 
66 Strategic and tactical airlift, helicopters or maritime lift may already be allocated to 
enduring operations. Therefore, once a NEO occurs, planners must prioritise and redeploy 
assets and enablers if required.
67 The decision to deploy a discrete joint forces logistic component remains with the joint 
task force commander.
79
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
5
Service support

from the UK.68 Therefore, if Defence are going to project forces from the UK 
home base, planners will have to consider the optimal use of strategic air 
assets (including commercial charter).69 This may require re-prioritisation of 
strategic airlift resources from other commitments by the Ministry of Defence 
(MOD) and strictly controlled through Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) 
J4 Mounting and Movements. Access, basing and overflight, including 
host-nation technical arrangements and memoranda of understanding, must 
be considered early in the planning process as approval may take longer than 
the desired deployment timelines.
5.4. Sustain. The duration and light footprint of a NEO dictates that 
sustainment requirements should be limited and planned on a basis of  
demand. The context of the crisis will shape the sustainment requirements, but, 
wherever possible, planners should reduce these by using host-nation support 
and/or support from multinational partners. Being aware of the potential lack 
of available maritime assets in the vicinity of a NEO, sea basing options should 
still be explored as they offer the advantage of being self-contained. This option 
would also reduce the reliance on host-nation support.
5.5. Materiel recovery. As stated in JDP 4-00, Logistics for Joint 
Operations,70 the operational planning headquarters should determine a joint 
desired order of departure (JDOD) item list. This should account for continuing 
operational responsibilities, force protection requirements and sensitive 
equipment to establish the sequence and timescale in which materiel is 
recorded, extracted and tracked from the joint operations area back to the UK.
5.6. Denial of materiel. The in-country embassy staff may hold a destruction 
plan for any materiel (especially sensitive equipment) that may need to be 
destroyed in situ if it cannot be recovered within the designated evacuation 
time frame. Such materiel may, in extremis, be destroyed with the appropriate 
permissions. All disposals (including destruction) should be planned and 
coordinated with both PJHQ J9 and the Joint Force Headquarters J4 staff. 
Further detailed information can be found in both JDP 4-00, Logistics for 
Joint Operations and Allied Joint Publication-3.13, Allied Joint Doctrine for the 
Deployment and Redeployment of Forces.
68 Maritime support is most likely to be achieved by re-tasking assets in relative proximity 
to the area of crisis.
69 The nature of the threat will determine whether the use of commercial aircraft is 
appropriate. All contracts will be set, operated and monitored by Defence Supply Chain 
Operations and Movements.
70 JDP 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations , Annex 9C, page 191.
80
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
5
Service support

5.7. Logistic support. Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office 
(FCDO) representatives in the countries where the forward mounting base 
and evacuation handling centre are located will assist in arranging host-nation 
support. Where the forward mounting base/evacuation handling centre is 
a permanent joint operating base, it will provide sustainment support. The 
single-Service force packages will generally be responsible for logistics to the 
second line. The joint task force headquarters will be responsible for: 
• managing the theatre end of the coupling bridge and joint support 
chain with PJHQ J4;
• monitoring the administrative and logistic support of deployed forces;
• securing host-nation support and making sure conflicts of interest do 
not arise between other nations over potentially scarce local resources; 
• sustaining stock levels in theatre (in conjunction with PJHQ J4);
• providing limited medical assistance, food, shelter and transport to 
eligible persons while under the duty of care of the military;
• casualty reporting and managing the in-theatre casualty evacuation 
chain; and 
• liaising with other forces, agencies and organisations to 
establish procedural deconfliction to achieve economies of scale 
through sharing other nations’, international organisations’ and 
non-government organisations’ capabilities.
5.8. Deceased evacuees. Even in a permissive NEO environment, the 
death of vulnerable eligible persons (such as the elderly, infirm or infants) may 
be encountered. The decision to evacuate the deceased is dependent on, 
but not limited to, the specifics of the situation. This may include the tactical 
environment, religions, host-nation laws, local customs, the wishes of any 
relatives, weather, health-related risk, the capacity of receiving ships/aircraft 
and availability of mortuary affairs qualified personnel. 
81
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
5
Service support

Section 2 – Medical
5.9. Within the Defence contingency capability, there are medical elements 
held at high or very high readiness that can provide a scalable medical 
response based on NEO planning. Medical support will be in place for 
deployed personnel from the point of injury or illness through to Role 4 in 
accordance with Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-4.10, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Medical Support (with UK national elements). Medical support to eligible 
persons will typically be agreed from the evacuation handling centre or 
point of embarkation to the place of safety or temporary safe location. If the 
operational situation requires it, there may be agreement to provide medical 
support earlier or later in the evacuation process. Planners must consider 
that Defence medical capability does not routinely care for children, pregnant 
women, nursing mothers, the elderly or those with serious chronic ill health. 
Non-standard equipment, pharmaceuticals, specialists and training for treating 
a civilian population must be considered from the outset.
5.10. Medical rules of eligibility. Medical rules of eligibility (MROE) define 
who is eligible for medical care in deployed medical treatment facilities. 
MROE must be established by the MOD and FCDO in close cooperation 
with the joint task force headquarters and Competent Medical Authority from 
the outset of a NEO. The agreed MROE is fundamental to the operations 
82
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
5
Service support
When planning a non-combatant evacuation operation, medical capability for treating  
 a civilian population needs to be considered at the earliest possible stage

planning process and should be coherent with the recognised eligible persons 
picture for evacuation. MROE will be guided by the mission mandate, political 
agreements and operational requirements; however, they must also meet the 
legal and ethical baseline of the law of armed conflict.71 Legal guidance should 
be sought where necessary regarding liability for, and scope of, medical 
treatment. MROE might need to change throughout the course of a NEO. 
Changes to MROE must be directed to MOD/FCDO level and, once agreed, 
be clearly communicated to all.
5.11. Environmental health. The events leading up to or during a NEO 
may have exacerbated endemic diseases, damaged civil infrastructure or 
created environmental and/or industrial hazards. This could pose health risks, 
particularly if there is a shortage of potable water and poor sanitation. Force 
Health Protection must be involved early in the planning process to assess 
and mitigate risks to eligible personnel and deployed forces throughout the 
evacuation chain. The nature of NEOs means there is rarely time for deploying 
personnel to receive immunisations or to acclimatise. Specific health protection 
measures may need to be taken or advised, depending on the force health 
protection instruction and assessment by the deployed Environmental Health 
Practitioner.
71 The law of armed conflict is also referred to as international humanitarian law.
83
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
5
Service support

 
Key points
• Each NEO is likely to be different and therefore the service support 
requirements will vary accordingly. Logistic considerations are likely to 
be critical in the operations planning process and will shape the potential 
courses of action for the NEO.
• The joint task force headquarters will centrally control the relatively small 
force typically deployed for a NEO (although it may need to be augmented 
to provide single-Service enablers and wider logistic governance depending 
on the scale of the NEO). 
• Access, basing and overflight, including host nation technical arrangements 
and memoranda of understanding must be considered early in planning as 
approval may take longer than desired deployment timelines.
• The operational planning headquarters should establish a JDOD item list to 
assist with materiel recovery.  
• Medical support to eligible persons will typically be agreed from the 
evacuation handling centre to the temporary safe location. 
• MROE define who is eligible for medical care in deployed medical treatment 
facilities. MROE must be established by the MOD and FCDO with close 
cooperation with the joint task force headquarters and Competent Medical 
Authority from the outset of a NEO.
• Civil disorder preceding a NEO may lead to damaged civil infrastructure 
and can exacerbate endemic diseases. Force Health Protection must be 
involved early in the planning process to assess and mitigate risks to eligible 
personnel and deployed forces throughout the evacuation chain.
84
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
5
Service support

Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
AJP  Allied joint publication
CDS  Chief of the Defence Staff
CEFO  combat equipment fighting order
CIS  communication and information systems
DCDC  Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre 
DCMO  Defence Crisis Management Organisation
EU  European Union
FCDO  Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
HKIA  Hamid Karzai International Airport
Info Ops information operations
ISR  intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
I&W  indicators and warnings
JDOD  joint desired order of departure
JDP  joint doctrine publication
JFHQ  Joint Force Headquarters
JSP  joint Service publication
MC  Military Committee
MNCC  multinational coordination centre
MOD  Ministry of Defence
MROE  medical rules of eligibility
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NCG  NEO Coordination Group
NEO  non-combatant evacuation operation
NEOCC NEO coordination cell
85
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Lexicon

OLRT  operational liaison and reconnaissance team
PJHQ  Permanent Joint Headquarters
RAF  Royal Air Force
ROE  rules of engagement
ROEREQ rules of engagement request
SCAEF  strategic communication actions and effects framework
TIFT  troops in fighting trim
UK  United Kingdom
UN  United Nations
US  United States
 
 
86
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
Lexicon

Section 2 – Terms and definitions
This section is divided into three parts. First, we list definitions modified by this 
publication which will be updated in JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement 
to NATOTerm. Second, we list endorsed terms and definitions and finally, we 
list unendorsed definitions that may be useful for the reader.
Modified definitions
evacuation handling centre 
A temporary secure location free from the threat of destabilising influences, 
where eligible persons can be received and processed by Foreign, 
Commonwealth and Development Office/Border Force officials to establish 
their eligibility for evacuation. (JDP 3-51, 3rd Edition, Version 2)
joint contingency plan 
Deliberate contingency plans prepared for a situation where it is assessed 
that there is a particular likelihood of an operation being mounted, or the 
anticipated warning time is reduced.  
Note: In addition to the planning data contained in joint planning guides, joint 
contingency plans contain specific information on military capabilities required 
and deployment options, including readiness states where applicable.  
(JDP 3-51, 3rd Edition)
reception centre 
Pre-designated sites, selected by His Majesty’s Representative as part of 
a diplomatic post’s civil management plan, where individuals can enter the 
evacuation chain. (JDP 3-51, 3rd Edition, Version 2)
Endorsed definitions
area of operations 
An area within a joint operations area defined by the joint force commander for 
conducting tactical level operations. (NATOTerm)
end state 
The political-strategic statement of conditions that defines an acceptable 
concluding situation to be attained at the end of a strategic engagement. 
(NATOTerm) 
87
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Lexicon

force protection 
All measures and means to minimize the vulnerability of personnel, facilities, 
equipment and operations to any threat and in all situations, to preserve 
freedom of action and the operational effectiveness of the force. (NATOTerm)
forward mounting base 
A base (also deployed operating base) established within the operational area, 
to support operations at a forward operating bases.  
Note: A forward mounting base will be resourced to a greater level than 
a forward operating base, including command and control, logistics and 
administration support elements. (JDP 0-01.1)
forward operating base 
A base established forward of a main operating base from which tactical 
operations are mounted and supported. (NATOTerm)
host nation 
A nation which, by agreement: 
a. receives forces and materiel of NATO or other nations operating on/from 
or transiting through its territory; 
b. allows materiel and/or NATO organizations to be located on its territory; 
and/or 
c. provides support for these purposes. (NATOTerm)
joint commander 
The commander who exercises the highest level of operational command of 
forces assigned with specific responsibility for deployment, sustainment, and 
recovery. (NATOTerm – not NATO Agreed)
joint operations area 
A temporary area within a theatre of operations defined by the Supreme Allied 
Commander Europe, in which a designated joint force commander plans and 
executes a specific mission at the operational level. (NATOTerm)
joint task force commander 
The operational commander of a nominated joint force.  
(NATOTerm – not NATO Agreed)
non-combatant evacuation operation 
An operation conducted to relocate designated non-combatants threatened in 
a foreign country to a place of safety. (NATOTerm) 
88
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2)
Lexicon

place of safety 
The point where eligible persons exit the evacuation chain and are no longer 
reliant on diplomatic or military assistance. (JDP 0-01.1)
task force 
1. A temporary grouping of units, under one commander, formed for the 
purpose of carrying out a specific operation or mission.  
2. A component of a fleet organised by the commander of a task fleet 
or higher authority for the accomplishment of a specific task or tasks. 
(NATOTerm)
Useful definitions for this publication
crisis management plan 
A plan (usually produced by the diplomatic post) which establishes a 
procedure for responding to crisis, including the evacuation of eligible persons. 
(JDP 3-51)
diplomatic post  
A generic term for His Majesty’s Government’s embassies or high 
commissions located in foreign countries. (JDP 3-51 3rd Edition, Version 2)
eligible person 
A non-combatant that is eligible for evacuation by the UK. Eligible persons 
will include British nationals and those individuals from other nations for 
whom the UK government and His Majesty’s Representative have accepted 
responsibility. (JDP 3-51, 3rd Edition, Version 2)
point of embarkation 
Secure sites with facilities permitting the safe ingress and egress for military 
transport; it is here that eligible persons arrive for military extraction to a 
temporary safe location or a place of safety. (JDP 3-51)
temporary safe location 
A location where eligible persons are safe from threat awaiting onward 
movement to a place of safety. (JDP 3-51)
warden system 
A network of volunteers located in the country in crisis, who act as a point of 
contact between His Majesty’s Representative and the wider community.  
(JDP 3-51, 3rd Edition, Version 2)
89
JDP 3-51 (3rd Edition, Version 2) 
Lexicon

 
Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2023Crown copyright 2023
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
The material in this publication is certified as an FSC mixed resourced product, fully recyclable and biodegradable.The material in this publication is certified as an FSC mixed resourced product, fully recyclable and biodegradable.


