Joint Doctrine Publication 2-00Intelligence, Counter-intelligence and Security Support to Joint Operations
Joint Doctrine Publication 2-00 
Intelligence, Counter-intelligence 
and Security Support to
Joint Operations 
Fourth Edition

[Page 2: No extractable text]

i
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 
Joint Doctrine Publication 2-00
Intelligence, Counter-intelligence 
and Security Support to Joint 
Operations
Joint Doctrine Publication 2-00 (JDP 2-00) (4th Edition),  
dated August 2023, is promulgated as directed 
by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre

ii
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via email at: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2023) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated).
Front cover image © NicoElNino / Shutterstock.com
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbeywood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk
Distribution
All DCDC publications can be demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and 
Operations Centre. 
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet (RLI) at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/IntranetUKStratCom/SitePages/
development-concepts-and-doctrine-centre-dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc

iii
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Preface
 
Purpose
1. The traditional military focus for intelligence and understanding was 
identifying and knowing about adversaries to either neutralise or defeat them. 
Operations across multiple operational domains now demand a broader 
understanding of all audiences, and intelligence supports commanders in 
gaining that understanding. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 2-00, Intelligence, 
Counter-Intelligence and Security Support to Joint Operations , 4th Edition, 
reinforces the enduring cross-governmental nature of intelligence and the 
need to inculcate a spirit of collaboration, including with partners and allies, 
in an interdepartmental and inter-agency context. To support this approach, 
commanders at all levels require accurate and timely intelligence and 
understanding to inform their decision-making. They must also know and 
understand their own role and that of their staff in developing and delivering it.  
Context
2. UK policy is to adopt North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) doctrine 
wherever possible. The retention of JDP 2-00 as the UK’s keystone intelligence 
publication is driven by several factors, including the implementation of 
integrated action and the concept of multi-domain integration, which 
impacts on intelligence and understanding. Additionally, the UK’s intelligence 
community has pursued a significant programme of professionalisation in 
analysis and analytical tradecraft, establishing new national standards to which 
the Ministry of Defence (MOD) is subject.
Audience
3. JDP 2-00 is written with three audiences in mind. First, it provides the 
opportunity for commanders at all levels to gain an understanding of the value 
of intelligence and the intelligence process. Secondly, it provides a reference 
document for MOD intelligence specialists (both civilian and military) on which 
subordinate documents can be based. Finally, it provides external readers with 
an explanation of MOD intelligence functions.

iv
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Structure
4. JDP 2-00 is divided into seven chapters with a supporting lexicon. An 
outline of the chapter contents is described below.
a. Chapter 1 – A contemporary approach to understanding and 
intelligence. This chapter explains the strategic context and the 
challenges for intelligence in the contemporary operating environment. 
b. Chapter 2 – The fundamentals of intelligence. This chapter 
considers a number of fundamental concepts that ensure commonality 
during MOD intelligence activities.
c. Chapter 3 – The core functions and the intelligence cycle. This 
chapter explains how intelligence is developed and provides detail on the 
principal intelligence functions.
d. Chapter 4 – Intelligence disciplines and activities. This chapter 
explains the core disciplines, specialisms and activities that collect 
information, which is subsequently processed into intelligence.
e. Chapter 5 – Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint 
operations. This chapter reviews intelligence support to joint operations. 
It concludes with a review of different approaches to intelligence 
development and an introduction to problem-centric approaches using 
activity-based intelligence.
f. Chapter 6 – Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures 
and training. This chapter explores the role and specific responsibilities 
of the joint commander and the intelligence staff. It also considers joint 
operational intelligence architectures.
g. Chapter 7 – Intelligence support to joint operational planning. This 
chapter outlines intelligence support to operational planning. It also 
highlights the stages in which intelligence contributes significantly to the 
operations planning process.

v
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Linkages
5. JDP 2-00 is intended to be read in conjunction with NATO’s Allied Joint 
Publication (AJP)-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence 
and Security. It should also be considered alongside AJP-01, Allied Joint 
Doctrine, JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, the NATO AJP-2 series 
of publications, and AJP-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations 
(with UK national elements).

vi
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 

vii
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Contents
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Chapter 1 – A contemporary approach to understanding and  
                   intelligence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – The fundamentals of intelligence  . . . . . . . . . . 23
Chapter 3 – The core functions and the intelligence cycle . . . . 35
Chapter 4 – Intelligence disciplines and activities  . . . . . . . . 75
Chapter 5 – Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to  
                    joint operations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
Chapter 6 – Underpinning joint Intelligence: people, structures  
                   and training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Chapter 7 – Intelligence support to joint operational planning  .  . 149
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167

[Page 10: No extractable text]

1
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 1
Section 1 – The strategic context and integrated  
                   action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – Purpose and aims of intelligence,  
                   counter-intelligence and security  . . . . . 6
Section 3 – UK national intelligence architecture. . . . 11
Section 4 – The function of intelligence  . . . . . . . . 15
Section 5 – The single intelligence environment  . . . . 17
Section 6 – Factors affecting intelligence in the                        
                   contemporary operating environment . . . 18
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Chapter 1 explains the strategic context and the challenges 
for intelligence in the contemporary operating environment. 
In particular, the chapter introduces integrated action and 
audience analysis to this publication, with audience analysis 
a primary consideration for intelligence staff.
© NicoElNino / Shutterstock.com

2
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
”
“Vital intelligence is no longer scarce, 
and it is easily accessible. The 
extraordinary capabilities of modern 
sensor technologies mean that the 
moves of prospective enemies can 
be monitored constantly ... While 
intelligence gathering has been 
transformed, and should alert civilian 
and military policymakers to dangers 
and opportunities, it is still not 
necessarily predictive – even the best 
intelligence can be subject to a range 
of interpretations.
 
 
Lawrence Freedman, Command 

3
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
Chapter 1
A contemporary approach 
to understanding and 
intelligence
Section 1 – The strategic context and 
integrated action
1.1. The nature of war does not change, but the character of warfare is 
changing rapidly, driven by the pace and pervasiveness of information and 
technological change. Distinctions between public and private, foreign 
and domestic, state and non-state, and virtual and physical are blurred.1 
The continuum of competition, as explained in Joint Doctrine Publication 
(JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, highlights the challenge of 
how international relations is conducted in the modern world. Set against 
this context, it is essential to provide high quality intelligence to support 
decision-making.
1.2. Multi-domain approach. JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine refers to the 
concept of multi-domain integration (MDI), where the greatest benefits come 
from being able to sense, understand, plan and then orchestrate combinations 
of activities across operational domains in concert with the other instruments 
of national power, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and other 
like-minded allies and partners. NATO refers to this framework as multi-domain 
operations and it is described further in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied 
Joint Doctrine. 
1.3. Integrated action. Integrated action can be described as the 
audience-centric orchestration of military activities, across all operational 
domains, synchronised with non-military activities to influence the attitude and 
behaviour of selected audiences necessary to achieve successful outcomes. 2 
Commanders need to: be clear about the outcome they seek; study the 
audiences relevant to the achieving the identified outcome; and analyse the 
1 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, Chapter 1.
2 JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, Chapter 2.

4
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
effects they wish to create on those target audiences. Only then should the 
mix of capabilities that are required to create physical, cognitive and virtual 
effects across the operational domains to affect the understanding, physical 
capability, will and cohesion of the audiences to achieve a successful outcome 
be determined. Understanding the audience is the major consideration of 
integrated action in pursuit of the outcome.
1.4. Audience analysis. Competition among states (and other actors) 
pursuing perceived interests is an inherent feature of international relations. 
Recognising that people, their decisions and behaviours, are at the heart of 
how international relations is conducted and how competition is resolved, a 
key part of integrated action is analysis to understand audiences. Audiences 
are segmented into three general categories – public, stakeholders and 
actors – depending on their ability to affect our outcomes. Intelligence is 
critical to enabling the understanding that provides the focus for planning and 
executing activity to create or maintain the attitudes that constitute behaviour. 
Commanders, with an understanding of the strategic narrative, can then 
conduct target audience analysis to identify the effects they wish to create. 
1.5. Threats, challenges and competitors. Intelligence supports the 
development of understanding across the spectrum of potential threats and 
challenges, and in understanding our competitors. Table 1.1 illustrates some of 
the most significant areas of intelligence focus.3
Threat Description
Peer threats An adversary with the capability and capacity to 
oppose UK Armed Forces across multiple operational 
domains worldwide or in a specific region, where they 
may also enjoy a position of relative advantage.
Hybrid threats These occur where military and non-military 
conventional, irregular and asymmetric threats are 
combined at the same time and space.
Cyber threats and 
the information 
space
Adversaries may operate in the cyber and 
electromagnetic domain as well as the physical 
environments.
Terrorism The unlawful use, or threatened use, of force or 
violence.
Espionage Clandestine intelligence acquisition activity, typically 
conducted for or by a hostile intelligence service.
3 AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence and Security , 
Chapter 1.

5
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
Threat Description
Vulnerable, failing, 
failed, post crisis or 
recovering states
Instability and violence may be more likely in those 
states that are less well-developed and where the state 
is unwilling or unable to provide security and basic 
services to a significant portion of the population. 4 
Climate change 
and environmental 
threats to humans
Unpredictable natural and human-induced phenomena 
can cause disease, forced migration and humanitarian 
disasters, which can result in a range of human 
insecurities. Climate change may also be a ‘threat 
multiplier’ given its potential to amplify traditional 
security challenges.
Weapons 
proliferation
The proliferation of weapons of mass effect and their 
means of delivery or manufacture may threaten severe 
consequences for global stability.
Organised crime Transnational, national or local groupings of criminal 
enterprises engaging in illegal activity, commonly for 
money and profit. Organised crime may also have links 
to terrorist or violent extremist activity.
Table 1.1 – Areas of intelligence focus
1.6. Human security. Human security is an approach to national and 
international security that places the emphasis on human beings, rather 
than the traditional focus on the security of the state. It is a framework that 
considers pre-, inter- and post-conflict phases, examines early warning 
mechanisms and responds to violent and destabilising situations. It is 
applicable to situations above and below the threshold of armed conflict, 
across all operational domains and boundaries. Defence’s approach uses the 
human security framework to understand root causes of crises and conflict, 
thereby: enabling better identification of opportunities for prevention and 
protection; mitigating the effects of harm; identifying enduring solutions; and 
strengthening the prospect of mission success. 
4 For further detail see AJP-3.28, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Military Contribution to 
Stabilization, Section 4.

6
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
Intelligence must be able to respond dynamically in times of rapidly emerging crises
Section 2 – Purpose and aims of 
intelligence, counter-intelligence and 
security
1.7. The relationship between intelligence and understanding. Understanding 
comes from applying judgement to knowledge to gain a deeper level of 
awareness of a situation and implications for the future. Judgement is a purely 
human skill, based on experience, expertise and intuition. Understanding, 
therefore, concerns acquiring, developing and applying knowledge to prioritise 
information requirements, make sense of a given context, make better decisions, 
and adapt and influence behaviours. Understanding includes having a detailed 
view of our national interests, our strategic partners and our international 
obligations. Intelligence plays a critical role by providing the processed 
information required to develop understanding. This includes not only answering 
the main intelligence questions of who, what, where, when, why and how, which 
provide the context and narrative of events, but also the deductive and predictive 
analysis (also known as insight and foresight), which provides the added 
value in an assessment. Further terms that are relevant when considering the 
development of intelligence and understanding are as follows.5
5 For a more detailed review of understanding, insight and foresight, see JDP 04, 
Understanding and Decision-making .

7
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
data 
A reinterpretable representation of information in a formalized manner 
suitable for communication, interpretation, or processing. 
Note: Data can be processed by humans or by automatic means. 
(NATOTerm)
information 
Data arranged to convey meaning. (NATOTerm)
intelligence 
The product resulting from the directed collection and processing of 
information regarding the environment and the capabilities and intentions of 
actors, in order to identify threats and other opportunities for exploitation by 
decision-makers. (NATOTerm)
understanding 
The ability to understand something; comprehension.  
(Concise Oxford English Dictionary )
A –Z
The purpose of intelligence, counter-intelligence and security
1.8. Intelligence in Defence. The intelligence-contributing organisations and 
departments across Defence help deliver effective and efficient intelligence in 
support of the UK’s national security objectives. In meeting these objectives 
at a strategic and operational level, Defence must understand the nature of 
global military, socio-economic, cultural, physical, political and human security 
circumstances, situations and scenarios for which the intelligence community 
provides that insight. Similarly, the intelligence community delivers outputs that 
contribute to that understanding. 
1.9. Intelligence support to operations. Operational complexities require 
commanders and decision-makers to regard intelligence, counter-intelligence 
and security as a critical prerequisite for the way UK Armed Forces are 
deployed and operate. Commanders need to provide clear direction on their 
intelligence requirements and the priority of those requirements to ensure all 
available intelligence resources can be drawn on to develop the commander’s 
understanding. Intelligence specialists will then develop intelligence networks 
to reflect the nature of the operation, emphasising the need for and enabling 

8
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
collaboration at all levels, whilst they may also need to include arrangements 
for the integration of intelligence provided by allies or other government 
departments.
The aims of intelligence, counter-intelligence and security
1.10. Intelligence. Intelligence contributes to a continuous and coordinated 
understanding of the operating environment, thereby supporting commanders 
in their decision-making by helping to increase their understanding. 
Commanders and staff at every level require intelligence to plan, direct, 
conduct and assess campaigns and operations. Intelligence is crucial in 
setting strategy, identifying and selecting specific objectives and targets, 
associating those objectives and targets with desired effects, and determining 
the means to accomplish the overall mission. The primary aims of intelligence 
are as follows.
a. Enable understanding. The intelligence staff present intelligence 
about the operating environment and audiences, including their 
intentions, capability and motivation. The intelligence staff should strive 
to put this intelligence into the context of the commander’s critical 
information requirements to enhance their understanding of the situation.
b. Provide support to strategy formulation. This role is largely defined 
by providing support and assessments to generate understanding of 
the operating environment, including adversaries and neutral actors’ 
capabilities and intent. It also includes helping to articulate a desired 
end state, goals, objectives and an appraisal of the resources needed.
c. Produce predictive assessments. Intelligence should be forward 
looking, enabling commanders to maintain the initiative. Predictive 
assessments involve assessing risks6 and identifying opportunities. 
To provide these predictive assessments, intelligence staff will use 
a number of techniques to analyse past and present intelligence to 
create possible and realistic adversary courses of action. To assist 
the understanding of risks and opportunities that a situation presents 
to the commander, intelligence staff will seek to deliver a predictive 
assessment articulated in terms of the ’most likely’ and ‘most 
dangerous’ adversary courses of action that could occur. This provides 
the commander with the ability to plan within realistic bounds.
6 Risk to force, risk to mission and risk to reputation.

9
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
d. Provide indicators and warnings. Intelligence activities detect and 
report time-sensitive intelligence and information on developments that 
could involve or constitute a threat. It includes forewarning of actions or 
intentions.
e. Intelligence monitoring. Intelligence monitoring provides an 
intelligence baseline on countries, regions and actors before a crisis 
arises. Open-source material, Defence relations and diplomatic activity 
contribute to monitoring. Normally based on the results of horizon 
scanning, the Chief of the Defence Staff determines Defence’s priorities 
for monitoring based on the advice of the Chief of Defence Intelligence 
(CDI) and drawing on requirements identified by the Joint Intelligence 
Committee (JIC). Intelligence monitoring comprises futures and horizon 
scanning, and ongoing monitoring activity to review and update 
previous assessments.
1.11. Counter-intelligence. Counter-intelligence focuses on the understanding 
of terrorism, espionage, sabotage, subversion and organised crime threats 
and vectors, and contests the operating space through proactive and 
reactive counter-intelligence activities. It entails collection of information, 
analysis and investigation of both state and non-state actors’ intelligence 
methods, capabilities and activities. It also contributes to security by depriving 
adversaries of accurate or detailed knowledge of the disposition and 
capabilities of friendly forces, whether through intelligence collection activities 
or unauthorised disclosure.
1.12. Security. Security focuses on protecting the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of personnel, information and assets. Security risk management 
advice will allow commanders to determine their appropriate prioritisation 
of resources to minimise, manage and mitigate potential threats to their 
operations, personnel, equipment and infrastructure.
Futures and horizon scanning
1.13. ‘Futures’, or futures studies, refers to different approaches to thinking 
about the future and exploring factors that could give rise to possible and 
probable future characteristics, events and behaviours. ‘Foresight’ refers to 
a process of conducting futures work and ‘horizon scanning’ is one specific 
technique, although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably. Horizon 
scanning is defined as: the systematic search across the global environment 

10
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
for potential threats, hazards and opportunities.7 In relation to the UK 
government, it is viewed as having a horizon beyond parliamentary terms; 
for military purposes, it may mean examining factors beyond the operational 
planning window. Futures work helps staff to:
• spot patterns of change, emerging trends, surprises and disruptors 
earlier, giving more time to respond;
• focus on the external context within which we create effect, taking 
account of the ‘big picture’;
• bring in alternative points of view and assist in challenge;
• create a narrative of the future, based on structured frameworks and 
evidence;
• explore multiple versions of the future – this mitigates the potential 
threat of single-outcome forecasting; and
• develop indicators and warnings on high-impact potential futures.
Intelligence as a joint function
1.14. Common to joint operations at all levels, intelligence is one of the eight 
defined joint functions.8 The joint functions are a framework that provides 
commanders and their staff with the means to visualise the activities of the 
force and to ensure all aspects of the operation are addressed. Intelligence, as 
a joint function,9 is one of the main drivers of the operations planning process 
and should be used in any operation, although its level of contribution and the 
level of demands may vary depending on the type of operation and complexity 
of the operating environment. 
7 JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
8 The joint functions are: manoeuvre, fires, command and control, intelligence, 
information, sustainment, force protection and outreach. Note that ‘outreach’ is termed 
‘civil-military cooperation’ within NATO.
9 Intelligence as one of the joint functions has a different meaning from the ‘function of 
intelligence’ described at Section 4.

11
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
Section 3 – UK national intelligence 
architecture
1.15. Structure and accountability. The Prime Minister has overall 
responsibility for intelligence and security matters and is accountable to 
Parliament for matters affecting the intelligence agencies and organisations 
collectively. For the agencies and organisations shown in Figure 1.1 (within 
the dotted line), the Secretary of State for Foreign, Commonwealth and 
Development Affairs (Foreign Secretary), Secretary of State for the Home 
Department (Home Secretary) and the Secretary of State for Defence (Defence 
Secretary) have delegated responsibilities. In their day-to-day operations, the 
principal intelligence and security agencies (the Secret Intelligence Service 
(SIS), the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) and the 
Security Service) operate under the immediate control of their respective 
heads, each of whom has a statutory duty to report annually on their Service’s 
performance to the Prime Minister and their Secretary of State.
Figure 1.1 – National intelligence architecture
National
Security
Secretariat
National Security
Council
National Security
Adviser
Chair of the Joint
Intelligence Committee
The Prime Minister
The Foreign Secretary The Home Secretary The Defence Secretary
Joint
Intelligence
Committee
Joint
Intelligence
Organisation
Secret
Intelligence
Service
Security
Service
Government
Communications
Headquarters


12
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
1.16. Structure within Defence. The Defence Secretary is ultimately 
responsible for Defence Intelligence. CDI reports to the Defence Secretary via 
Commander Strategic Command (Comd UKStratCom). Figure 1.1 shows only 
the major organisations; several other organisations contribute intelligence 
assessments on strategic issues including, for example, the Joint Terrorism 
Analysis Centre (JTAC) and National Cyber Security Centre (NCSC).
National structures
1.17. National Security Adviser. The National Security Adviser (NSA) is the 
central coordinator and adviser to the Prime Minister and Cabinet on security, 
intelligence, defence and some foreign policy matters. The NSA works in the 
Cabinet Office and works across departments to develop a coherent national 
security strategy.
1.18. National Security Council. Headed by the NSA, the National Security 
Council (NSC) is where ministers discuss national security issues at a strategic 
level. It is a Cabinet committee that coordinates policy decisions across 
departments, involving national security, foreign policy, defence, international 
relations and development, resilience, energy and resource security. 
1.19. National Security Secretariat. The National Security Secretariat is 
also led by the NSA. It supports the NSC by coordinating cross-Whitehall 
preparations for weekly NSC meetings and implementing decisions.
1.20. Joint Intelligence Committee. The JIC provides all-source intelligence 
assessments on threats to the UK and UK interests overseas. It supports the 
Prime Minister, NSC and a wide range of policymakers across government. 
1.21. Joint Intelligence Organisation. The Joint Intelligence Organisation 
(JIO) leads on intelligence assessment and the development of the UK 
intelligence community’s analytical capability. The JIO incorporates the Cabinet 
Office Assessments Staff (COAS) and the Professional Head of Intelligence 
Analysis (PHIA).
National intelligence assessment in government
1.22. Cabinet Office Assessments Staff. The COAS consists of intelligence 
analysts seconded from a wide range of government departments and 
disciplines. It coheres the Current Intelligence Group (CIG), which brings 
together intelligence analysts, collectors, policymakers and other subject 

13
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
matter experts. The CIG supports the COAS to draft consensus-based 
assessments of situations and issues of concern, providing warnings of threats 
to UK interests and identifying and monitoring countries at risk of instability.
1.23. Cabinet Office – Professional Head of Intelligence Assessment. The 
PHIA maintains oversight of the assessment of intelligence across government, 
implementing a professional standards framework and promoting best practice 
to improve the government’s analytical capability. The PHIA heads up the 
cross-community intelligence assessment profession, comprising a wide range 
of government departments, organisations and joint task forces. 
1.24. Ministry of Defence – Defence Intelligence. Defence Intelligence 
provides military-focused all-source intelligence assessment, geospatial 
intelligence and a range of other intelligence outputs for Defence and the wider 
UK government. It guides decisions on policy, strategy and the maintenance 
of operational commitments, informs Defence procurement decisions and 
supports military operations. Defence Intelligence also contributes to wider 
national assessment efforts, including the work of the JIC, at which it has a seat. 
It works closely with other intelligence organisations and provides support to 
other government departments. It works closely with Five Eyes nations, NATO, 
the European Union and other allies. Defence Intelligence is headed up by CDI 
and is accountable to Parliament via the Intelligence and Security Committee.
1.25. Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office Research 
Analysts. Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) Research 
Analysts are a specialist cadre of regional and thematic experts. They provide 
evidence-based research and analysis primarily to FCDO ministers and senior 
officials. 
1.26. Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre. The JTAC analyses and assesses all 
intelligence relating to the international terrorist threat, at home and overseas. 
It sets threat levels and issues warnings of threats and other terrorist-related 
subjects. 
1.27 . National Cyber Security Centre. The NCSC provides cybersecurity 
support to the UK’s most critical organisations, the wider public sector, 
industry, subject matter experts and the general public. 
1.28. Joint State Threats Assessment Team. The Joint State Threats 
Assessment Team (JSTAT) is a cross-departmental assessment organisation 
that provides analysis on the hybrid state threats facing the UK and UK 

14
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
interests. It assesses the national security threat posed by activities such as 
espionage, assassination, interference in the UK’s democracy, and threats to 
the UK’s economic security and the UK’s people and assets overseas. 
1.29. National Crime Agency. The National Crime Agency (NCA) seeks to 
protect the UK from the threat of serious and organised crime. NCA officers 
work with law enforcement to build an intelligence picture of all serious and 
organised crime threats and pursue the most serious and dangerous offenders.
1.30. Home Office – Extremism Analysis Unit. The Extremism Analysis 
Unit’s (EAU’s) remit is to analyse extremism in the UK and overseas where it 
has a direct impact on the UK or UK interests. The EAU is a cross-government 
resource.
National intelligence collection in government
1.31. Secret Intelligence Service. The SIS exists to protect the UK’s people, 
economy and interests from overseas threats. It is commonly known as MI6.
1.32. Government Communications Headquarters. GCHQ is responsible 
under the Intelligence Services Act 1994 for the collection of signals 
intelligence to support the government’s policymaking and operations in the 
fields of national security, military operations, law enforcement and economic 
well-being. GCHQ also undertakes information assurance to help protect 
government data (communication and information systems) from threats.
1.33. Security Service. More commonly known as MI5, the Security Service 
operates within UK territory and is responsible under the Security Service 
Act 1989 for the protection of national security. It is responsible for protection 
against threats from espionage, terrorism and sabotage, from the activities 
of agents of foreign powers, and from actions intended to overthrow or 
undermine parliamentary democracy by political, industrial or violent means. 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization intelligence organisation 
and responsibilities
1.34. NATO intelligence architecture. NATO has its own intelligence 
organisation led by the Assistant Secretary General for Intelligence 
and Security. The NATO intelligence architecture, its organisation and 
responsibilities are described in detail in AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence and Security.

15
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
The Ministry of Defence and the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
Section 4 – The function of intelligence
1.35. The ‘function of intelligence’ (hereafter ‘the function’) was established in 
July 2020 as one of 16 functions in the Ministry of Defence (MOD).10 They cover 
cross-cutting activities that need to be carried out in a coherent way across all 
the organisations in Defence, provide horizontal integration and enable MOD 
business to be done effectively, efficiently, legally and in compliance with wider 
government policy. This aligns Defence with the government-wide approach 
and replaces the Defence Authorities construct. 
1.36. Purpose. The purpose of the function is to lead and cohere intelligence 
activities across Defence and it serves the interests of Defence’s work to 
support national security. Under the 3* CDI as functional owner, the function 
provides leadership of Defence’s intelligence enterprise. It delivers assured and 
trusted understanding for decision-makers, as well as effective and efficient 
employment of Defence’s intelligence people, assets and capabilities. It 
supports the breadth of Defence’s intelligence requirements, enabling MDI to 
support decision advantage.
10 Currently there are eight unique to Defence, the remaining eight are cross-government 
functions. This is separate from intelligence being one of the eight joint functions described 
in Section 2.

16
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
1.37. Delivery. The function is delivered by many elements of the MOD, 
including Defence Intelligence, Head Office and the front line commands, and 
encompasses people, processes and systems across the MOD engaged 
in intelligence activities. The function’s authority does not extend outside of 
Defence.
1.38. Priorities. Six priority activities have been identified to strengthen 
intelligence delivery across Defence. These priority activities are: 
• intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) management;
• capabilities;
• policies;
• people;
• training; and
• events and enterprise plans.
1.39. Policy. Across Defence there are several business areas and avenues 
through which intelligence-related policy is created, managed and assured. 
Defence benefits from the fact that CDI can mandate intelligence discipline 
policies across Defence, whilst MOD Head Office advises on the sensitive 
political and presentational aspects of intelligence operations. The main areas 
of responsibility are as follows.
a. Ministry of Defence Head Office, Security Policy and 
Operations Specialist Intelligence Policy. They are responsible 
for administering the ministerial rules for intelligence collection and 
for handling approvals for certain intelligence operational activity. 
Security Policy and Operations Specialist Intelligence Policy is also 
the supervisory authority for Defence intelligence activities that are 
conducted in accordance with the Regulation of Investigatory Powers 
Act (RIPA) across the MOD.
b. Defence Intelligence, Joint User Intelligence and Cyber. They 
are responsible for preparing and managing single intelligence 
policies for use across the MOD. Their remit applies to all intelligence 
disciplines.
c. Defence Intelligence, Defence Intelligence Resources and 
Policy. They are responsible for the management of policy relating to 
the Investigatory Powers Act in the MOD, including handling warrant 

17
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
applications under the Act. Defence Intelligence Resources and Policy 
also issue policy relating to the use of bulk personal data.
d. Defence Intelligence, Chief Information Officer. Defence 
Intelligence’s Chief Information Officer leads Defence Intelligence’s 
information and data services to deliver the digital and data function 
across Defence Intelligence through innovation, data operations 
and information governance, assurance and management. The 
Chief Information Officer also champions information behavioural 
changes and digitisation across Defence Intelligence so that data and 
information is valued, owned, appropriately managed, quality improved 
and better exploited in a timely manner.
Section 5 – The single intelligence 
environment
1.40. The single intelligence environment (SIntE) is a collaborative 
environment in which coherence is intrinsic through continuous, multi-domain 
capability development and delivery between MOD Head Office, front line 
commands, partners across government and allies. The SIntE aims to 
harmonise all elements of the intelligence process to achieve the optimal use 
of intelligence specialists, agencies, sources, technology and activities to 
produce the best possible outcomes.
1.41. Vision. The SIntE vision is to enable leaders at all levels to conduct 
effective decision-making on the basis of comprehensive understanding 
derived from all sources of intelligence. The SIntE facilitates and enables 
actionable content and advice to inform UK Defence, the UK government 
and decision-making with allies. It allows success to be measured against 
Defence’s ability to objectively produce accurate and timely assessments of 
possible events and their likelihoods, indicators and warnings, together with 
associated dissemination to decision-makers.
1.42. Ownership and direction. CDI, as the functional owner for intelligence 
across Defence, provides the strategic demand and the direction and 
guidance for the development, delivery and assurance of coherent intelligence 
capability. CDI is also responsible for: policy and standards; ensuring the 
coherence of Defence’s intelligence activities across the single Services; and 
managing risk within the SIntE. 

18
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
1.43. Method of operating. The SIntE is a collaborative endeavour with 
Defence linked to all the members of the UK intelligence community. The 
SIntE, when fully realised, supports an enterprise that anticipates and predicts, 
rather than responds to, events as they unfold. It will support the use of big 
data, artificial intelligence and cloud-based technologies that will dominate the 
future landscape. Cultures, behaviours and processes are also as fundamental 
to realising the benefits of the SIntE as the ability to keep pace with rapidly 
changing technological solutions. The SIntE’s method of operating and 
principles are detailed in the SIntE Sub-Strategy.11
Section 6 – Factors affecting 
intelligence in the contemporary 
operating environment
1.44. Operating in complexity. Contemporary operations are likely to be 
complex with adversaries being potentially more difficult to identify. There are 
also likely to be a greater range of actors that will influence operations and 
multiple interested audiences. It is not sufficient just to know about actors and 
their capabilities, although identifying, neutralising, countering or defeating 
adversaries remains one of the primary areas of military focus. There is a 
need to understand the context within which actors operate, the institutions 
within which they live and detailed information about their cultures, fears, 
perceptions, motivations and history, as well as the human security context 
and related conflict drivers. 
1.45. Contextual understanding. The complexity of modern operations 
produces a greater need for contextual understanding of the operating 
environment.12 This relies on a wide range of sources and geospatial, cultural 
and linguistic capabilities for information collection and the subsequent 
analysis of that information to convert it into intelligence. The implications 
for commanders are that some intelligence staff may need context-specific 
training and that continuity within the intelligence staff is a prerequisite to 
effective intelligence assessments. There is a requirement to pull in deep 
specialists from across Defence when required.
11 See also the SIntE Sub-Strategy; this document is produced by Joint User and 
classified at OFFICIAL -SENSITIVE.
12 Understanding the context as well as the intentions and capability of any potential 
adversary is reinforced in the MOD’s The Good Operation – A handbook for those involved 
in operational policy and its implementation , page 21.

19
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
1.46. A dynamic understanding and intelligence network. Dynamic and 
flexible networks, which can adapt to changing requirements, are required to 
produce contextual intelligence. This requires intelligence staff to consult with 
subject matter experts and a variety of specialists, within and outside Defence, 
including those living within the affected state. Non-UK experts, particularly 
those from an affected country, can provide a great deal of context and 
access to support intelligence analysis.
1.47. The orchestration of intelligence. The way that we orchestrate 
intelligence will increasingly need to be agile and dynamic. There are two 
approaches: conventional and adaptive. The conventional approach has fixed 
lines and boundaries between departments that include rules for inter-agency 
cooperation. The adaptive approach requires a more flexible and open system, 
where agencies work together to focus their efforts at a point of need; the 
requirement for common protocols between agencies remains, but these 
should be agile and based on the principle of collaboration – how can we work 
together rather than articulating the obstacles to working together. 
1.48. Intelligence and the levels of operations. Traditional boundaries of 
the strategic, operational and tactical levels of operations have less relevance 
when related to intelligence. The point at which intelligence becomes strategic, 
operational or tactical is the point when a decision is made, or activity is 
undertaken at one of these levels. Tactical military commanders may require 
access to intelligence that originates at the strategic level and tactically derived 
intelligence may have strategic importance.
1.49. Cultural capability. Cultural capability is the ability to understand 
culture, including tangible and non-tangible artefacts, and to apply this 
knowledge to understand and engage effectively with the full range of actors 
in different environments. Cultural capability is critical to understanding and 
requires us to develop cultural expertise for the areas in which we operate or 
are likely to operate, together with a general awareness of other cultures and of 
how culture influences perceptions.
1.50. Information security and protection. Protecting and securing our 
intelligence and the information and data on which it is based is essential in 
ensuring the protection of individuals, organisations and intelligence sources. 
Adherence to security procedures is essential for ensuring continued access to 
intelligence derived from partners across government and international allies. 
Defence Intelligence is also responsible for establishing common Defence 
guidelines for collaboration with other government agencies to enable effective 
intelligence sharing. 

20
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
1.51. Deception and counter-deception. The fundamental nature of 
deception may not have changed (i.e. hide the real and show the false), but the 
ways in which deception can be created and executed within the contemporary 
operating environment have changed. Deceptive stratagems can be used 
in three distinct roles: the offensive role (attack to defeat), the defensive 
role (protect the force – its people and its assets), and counter-deception 
(the detection of an adversary’s use of deception). The intelligence function 
can support all these roles, with the detection of deception against friendly 
forces being a specific intelligence responsibility. Intelligence staff also have a 
significant role in advising the commander and their J3/5 staff on their response 
to countering deception against friendly forces.13
1.52. Intelligence and gaining advantage through information. Information 
is a critical enabler to mission command and a multi-domain approach. It 
enables understanding, decision-making, and command and control. The 
ever-increasing volume of information and data available represents one of the 
biggest challenges for producing intelligence and will continue to challenge 
available human analytical capacity. Technological developments to assist 
analysts within the intelligence cycle will therefore continue to increase in their 
significance. Equally, adapting analytical tradecraft techniques, processes and 
methodology is vital to ensure the volume of data collected is processed and 
analysed to its maximum potential.
1.53. Digital and data developments. The character of intelligence analysis 
and the vast availability of data in the contemporary operating environment 
is such that there will continue to be a significant dependency on information 
systems and supporting technology. Intelligence needs to be able to cope with 
big data (high velocity data, data of increasing variety, growing volume and of 
varying veracity) that is difficult for Defence to process, store and analyse using 
traditional analytical methods and information management architectures. 
Further developments in the fields of automation, artificial intelligence, 
machine learning and other data-related technologies will provide significant 
opportunities to enhance how intelligence business is conducted. 
13 Further detail is in AJP-3.10.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Operations Security and 
Deception.

21
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
1
A contemporary approach to understanding and intelligence
Key points
• Understanding the audience is the major consideration of integrated 
action.
• An audience-centric approach places people at the heart of competition. 
Audience analysis segments audiences into three categories: public, 
stakeholders and actors. The position of individuals and groups within 
the range of audiences is not fixed, and therefore the requirement for 
audience analysis is enduring. 
• Intelligence aims to contribute to a continuous and coordinated 
understanding of the operating environment, supporting commanders in 
decision-making by helping them to increase their understanding. 
• The primary aims of intelligence are to enable understanding, produce 
predictive assessments, provide indicators and warnings, and to support 
strategy formulation.
• The ‘function of intelligence’ is one of 16 functions in the MOD. Its 
purpose is to lead and cohere intelligence activities across Defence.
• The SIntE aims to harmonise all elements of the intelligence process 
to achieve the optimal use of intelligence resources, technology and 
activities to produce the best possible outcomes.
• Meeting the challenge of big data will continue to require technological 
advances, incorporating automation, artificial intelligence, machine 
learning and the development of the digital ecosystem to support 
Defence’s intelligence community. 

[Page 32: No extractable text]

23
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 2
Section 1 – The principles of intelligence. . . . . . . . 25
Section 2 – Guidelines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Section 3 – The levels of intelligence. . . . . . . . . . 29
Section 4 – Categories of intelligence assessment. . . 30
Section 5 – The limitations of intelligence  . . . . . . . 31
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Intelligence enables commanders to understand their 
audiences and environment and then exploit that to their 
advantage. Chapter 2 considers a number of fundamental 
concepts that ensure commonality during Ministry of 
Defence intelligence activities. 

24
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
If you know the enemy and know 
yourself, you need not fear the result 
of a hundred battles.
 
 
Sun Tzu, The Art of War 
 ”
“

25
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
Chapter 2
The fundamentals of 
intelligence
Section 1 – The principles of intelligence
2.1. Intelligence development at all levels is guided by several principles. 
These should govern the mindset, organisation and activities of those involved.
2.2. Command or decision-maker led. Setting the conditions for effective 
intelligence is a fundamental responsibility of command. If decision-makers 
are unable to sufficiently express their critical information and intelligence 
requirements, this can lead to a lack of understanding and degradation of 
decision advantage. 
2.3. Objectivity. Intelligence should always be unbiased and it requires staff 
to be open-minded. Intelligence staff should not distort assessments to fit 
preconceived ideas or to provide answers that they think commanders or 
planners want. 
2.4. Perspective. Alternative perspectives reinforce objectivity. Even facts 
supported by strong evidence will be contested by others and understanding 
somebody’s perception can be as important as understanding the facts. 
2.5. Agility. Intelligence staff should continuously adapt their activities to 
the changing environment and the requirements of their commanders. This 
particularly implies mental and organisational agility. Agility is further supported 
by resilience, adaptation and flexibility.
a. Resilience. Not all activity will immediately be successful. It is essential 
to be persistent, adapt quickly and exploit opportunities when they arise. 
b. Adaptation. Learning and adaptation can only occur through a 
comprehensive review of results. This enables us to reduce negative 
unintended consequences, exploit positive unintended consequences 
and pursue those outcomes originally intended. 

26
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
c. Flexibility. Flexibility allows the redirection of effort to meet changing 
circumstances. It also shuns the notion that there is only one way of 
working. 
2.6. Timeliness. Intelligence should be delivered in time. It is better to provide 
80% of the intelligence in time, with appropriate caveats on confidence levels, 
than 100% of the intelligence too late. 
2.7. Collaboration. Sharing individual understanding to achieve greater 
collective and common understanding is a powerful tool in joint and coalition 
operations.14 The ‘need to know’ principle may endure to maintain security, 
but a collaborative environment relies on a ‘duty to share’ culture across and 
possibly outside government, underpinned by pragmatic risk management.
2.8. Continuity. Experience is gained slowly but can be lost quickly. Some 
skills are enduring and transferable, particularly in ongoing operations. 
Maintaining access to subject matter experts is one way to achieve continuity 
of understanding. 
2.9. Security. Security permeates the entire intelligence enterprise. Security 
risks are mitigated by technical measures, enforcing rules and procedures, 
discipline (including self-discipline) and effective counter-intelligence operations.
2.10. Additional NATO principles. The principles of intelligence detailed in the 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO’s) Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-2, 
Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence and Security are 
broadly similar to the UK principles. However, NATO has the following additions.
a. Interoperability. Common or interoperable processes, networks 
and systems are required to support intelligence direction, collection, 
processing and dissemination. They are also required to manage the 
intelligence organisation. 
b. Sharing/collaboration. Intelligence has the capability to draw on 
the skills of a wide spectrum of experts and specialists in a variety of 
organisations, across all commands and at all levels of operations. It 
should be noted that any sharing of intelligence with foreign authorities 
must comply with the UK government’s policy The Principles to ensure 
compliance with UK domestic and international law and guard against 
shared intelligence contributing to unacceptable conduct. 
14 Individual understanding may be described as our own personal interpretation of the 
facts; see Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 04, Understanding and Decision-making .

27
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
c. Accessibility. Relevant information and intelligence must be 
processed by intelligence staff and be readily available to intelligence 
users. Intelligence is of no value if it is not disseminated or accessible to 
those who require it. 
d. Anticipation. Intelligence is as much about warning and forecasting 
possible future developments for decision-makers as it is about 
delivering for current circumstances. 
Section 2 – Guidelines
2.11. The challenges of complex operations force intelligence staff to adapt in 
the ways they plan and operate. The following guidelines should be considered 
when designing and implementing intelligence structures to support operations.
a. Commanders and their intelligence staff. The trust between 
commanders and their intelligence staff must be strong and immediate. 
Commanders must drive their critical information requirements and 
enable the intelligence staff to work them through independently. 
b. Common aim. Intelligence production is not an end in itself. The 
staff must maintain sight of the commander’s end requirements. 
c. Synchronisation with planning and operation cycles. The 
intelligence process must support the operational and planning cycles. 
Intelligence is only of value if it supports operational outcomes.
d. A comprehensive view of the dynamics of situations is required.  
Intelligence assessments should include the physical, cognitive and 
virtual dimensions of the information environment and should consider 
all actors and threats within the wider area of interest. 
e. Data centricity. The key to a data-centric approach to intelligence 
is access to data to truly understand intelligence gaps whilst reducing 
the burden on finite resources (both analytical and intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) assets) and fully supporting 
decision-making in a timely manner. A data-centric approach must be 
supported by the appropriate architecture, security and information 
policies and the correct skill sets. 

28
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
Precision and accuracy: extensive surveillance established Daesh’s use of former Iraqi  
presidential palaces as headquarters and training centres
f. Fusion at the point of need. An all- or multiple-source approach to 
intelligence development (considering every available relevant  
source/data/information) uses the concept of intelligence fusion to 
optimise the value of various sources of information. Fusion is the 
blending of information and data from multiple sources or agencies into 
a coherent picture. Intelligence consisting of all relevant and available 
data, information, ISR results and other assessments provides higher 
accuracy and confidence levels. Source referencing in multiple-source 
approaches further enhances confidence and auditability. 
g. Precision and accuracy. Adversaries are as likely to be 
low-contrast or low-resolution as they are to be clearly defined and 
categorised. Precision and accuracy in analysis and assessments is 
therefore essential.
h. Intelligence sharing. Intelligence should be shared horizontally 
as well as vertically within a command structure. The key to effective 
data and intelligence sharing is an information environment where 
intelligence can be accessed.

29
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
Section 3 – The levels of intelligence
2.12. As stated in Chapter 1, traditional boundaries of the strategic, 
operational and tactical levels of operations have less relevance when related 
to intelligence, but they can still provide a helpful indicator of its function.15 
Strategic, operational and tactical intelligence are formally defined in Allied joint 
doctrine, with the definitions for the levels of intelligence as follows.
a. Strategic intelligence. Strategic intelligence is defined as: 
intelligence required for the formation of policy, military planning and the 
provision of indications and warnings at the national and/or international 
levels.16 This is typically gathered in response to government 
requirements, focusing on national threats, supra-national issues and 
conflict drivers. The nature of strategic intelligence means that a wide 
variety of intelligence sources and assets outside national capabilities 
are used. 
b. Operational intelligence. Operational intelligence is defined as: 
intelligence required for the planning and conduct of campaigns at the 
operational level.17 The primary users of this type of intelligence are 
operational-level commanders and decision-makers with a specific area 
of responsibility.
c. Tactical intelligence. Tactical intelligence is defined as: intelligence 
required for the planning and execution of operations at the tactical level.18 
Tactical intelligence normally supports specific activities by tactical-level 
commanders or units. In most cases, intelligence assets providing tactical 
intelligence belong to the tactical headquarters involved.19   
2.13. Non-military views of the strategic, operational and tactical.  
Commanders and intelligence staff must consider that non-military 
organisations may have different definitions for strategic, operational and 
tactical levels. This is especially true when working with civilian organisations 
and law enforcement agencies. 
15 See JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, paragraph 3.8 for additional detail on 
the levels of operations.
16 NATOTerm.
17 NATOTerm.
18 NATOTerm.
19 For example, UK intelligence collection units assigned to support UK forces within the 
UK area of operations.

30
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
Section 4 – Categories of intelligence 
assessment
2.14. Intelligence assessments reflect their intended use and include periodic 
intelligence summaries, specific intelligence reports and threat assessments. 
The naming conventions are broad but there are three categories of 
intelligence assessment.
a. Basic intelligence. Basic intelligence is defined as: intelligence 
derived from any source, that may be used as reference material for 
planning and as a basis for processing subsequent information or 
intelligence.20 Basic intelligence includes details of orders of battle, 
equipment capabilities, personalities, infrastructure, socio-political, 
economic, cultural and human security, and environmental aspects. 
Some UK intelligence agencies use the term ‘building-block intelligence’ 
when referring to basic intelligence. Basic intelligence provides the 
context and backdrop against which current intelligence is reviewed.
b. Current intelligence. Current intelligence is defined as: intelligence 
that reflects the current situation at strategic, operational and/or tactical 
levels.21 It can offer greater granularity than basic intelligence, but 
generally reflects a moment in time and it is perishable. 
c. Applied intelligence. This may be described as intelligence that 
is tailored to provide direct support to the decision-making process. It 
involves analysis of basic and current intelligence to meet specific and 
normally predictive intelligence requirements with a particular focus on 
future situations to enable timely planning and/or provide a warning. It 
includes: an adversary’s probable courses of action; how to influence 
audiences; specific reports on adversary capabilities which may 
influence the conduct of operations; and actions by other agencies. 
20 NATOTerm. Basic intelligence is fused from all available data, information, joint ISR 
results, single-source intelligence and all -source intelligence and it is fundamental to 
current intelligence.
21 NATOTerm.

31
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
Section 5 – The limitations of 
intelligence
2.15. Intelligence production has limitations. This list is not exhaustive, but 
some of the limitations are outlined below. Additionally, it is essential to ensure 
that intelligence, counter-intelligence and security activities are conducted 
in accordance with the applicable law. Intelligence planners must know 
what is legally permissible when formulating intelligence planning to develop 
intelligence architectures and ensure that appropriate limitations are placed 
on permitted activity to ensure compliance. See Chapter 4 for further detail on 
legal considerations.
2.16. Human judgement. Human beings have limits making exacting 
analytical judgements in complex and rapidly changing environments. This 
impacts not only assessment but also decisions made because of them. 
Intelligence may also not meet the commander’s requirements exactly or be 
entirely accurate, complete or easily corroborated, but the commander will 
have to make judgements and decisions based on it. 
2.17. Audience intentions. It has always been exceptionally difficult to 
determine an adversary’s intentions. In the contemporary and future operating 
environments, where the size of an adversary’s military capability may be 
less relevant due to unconventional or hybrid tactics, intelligence staff should 
ensure that commanders understand the increased difficulty of determining an 
adversaries’ and other audiences’ capabilities and intentions. 
2.18. Uncertainty. Decision-makers and practitioners should accept that 
intelligence must be bounded with degrees of probability and confidence due 
to levels of uncertainty associated with assessments. Confidence expresses 
an analyst’s judgement about the robustness of their assessment, whereas 
probability is an assessment of the likelihood of certain events occurring. No 
future course of events can be known in advance, meaning that predictive 
judgements can only be expressed as probabilities. At the same time, the 
problems of incompleteness and potential deception mean that there are 
always limitations to the confidence of analytic judgements. Intelligence staff 
must state where there are knowledge gaps to enable a commander to place 
appropriate weight on the assessment.22
22 For more information on uncertainty, see Defence Intelligence, Quick Wins for Busy 
Analysts.

32
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
2.19. Extent of available capability. All collection, exploitation and processing 
assets have limitations. These limitations may arise from availability, volume 
and the ability/capacity to process, exploit or disseminate in a timely manner. 
Intelligence staff must closely engage with the ISR staff for a realistic appraisal 
of collection, exploitation and processing capability. Information obtained rarely 
provides a complete picture and any sources of information must be liable to 
doubt and additional scrutiny. 
2.20. Relevance/obsolescence. All intelligence is time-bound and subject 
to expiry. Constant evaluation and updating of the existing current intelligence, 
as well as the production of new intelligence, will preserve the relevance of 
information given to commanders and their staff. The continuous updating of 
basic intelligence is also necessary.
2.21. Source protection. Source protection is critical where sensitive or 
covert collection capabilities are involved. However, source protection should 
not become a reason for withholding intelligence from those who need to 
know. The compromise of a source could result in the information no longer 
being available, the source being used to pass deceptive information or the 
source being physically harmed or removed. Often, authority for release for 
information derived from sensitive or covert collection capabilities will be 
controlled through higher authorities, including potentially at the national level.
2.22. Management of expectations. Even when exploited fully, intelligence 
will not produce complete certainty. Intelligence staff must be realistic about 
what intelligence activity can achieve and they must manage the commander’s 
expectations while doing all they can to optimise available resources.

33
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
2
The fundamentals of intelligence
Key points
• The UK principles that underpin intelligence are: command or 
decision-maker led, objectivity, perspective, agility, timeliness, 
collaboration, continuity and security. NATO’s additional principles are: 
interoperability, sharing/collaboration, accessibility and anticipation. 
• The levels of intelligence are strategic, operational and tactical.
• There are three categories of intelligence assessment: basic, current 
and applied.
• The principal limitations of intelligence are: human judgement; 
determining audience intentions; uncertainty; collection, exploitation 
and processing limitations; relevance/obsolescence of information; 
source protection; and the management of expectations.

[Page 44: No extractable text]

35
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 3
Section 1 – The intelligence core functions  . . . . . . 37
Section 2 – Direction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Section 3 – Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Section 4 – Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Section 5 – Dissemination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
The purpose of Chapter 3 is to explain how intelligence is 
developed and to provide detail on the core intelligence 
functions. These functions are referred to as the ‘intelligence 
cycle’. This publication places particular emphasis on the 
processing and analysis undertaken within the intelligence 
cycle. 

36
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
A good intelligence assessment has 
explanatory value in helping deepen 
real understanding of how a situation 
has arisen, the dynamics between 
the parties and what the motivations 
of the actors involved are likely to be. 
Sir David Omand, Securing the State 
”
“

37
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Chapter 3
The core functions and 
the intelligence cycle
Section 1 – The intelligence core 
functions
3.1. The intelligence process is the collection, processing and analysis 
of information to answer specific questions and contribute to wider 
understanding. It must be sufficiently adaptable and dynamic to pass 
information as rapidly as possible to those who need it. This does not negate 
the requirement for a systematic approach, but it demands that we approach 
the development of intelligence differently – imagination and a spirit of 
collaboration are critical. 
3.2. The intelligence cycle. There are four overarching core functions in the 
intelligence cycle: direction, collection, processing and dissemination (DCPD). 
Information must be acquired from all sources available, it must be properly 
understood and its significance for decision-making assessed. All of this must 
be conducted based on clear and methodical requirements for information 
and the subsequent assessments must be conveyed to those who need them 
to support their decision-making. All these activities take place concurrently 
and interact with one another, overlap and coincide but, ultimately, they 
are intended to meet information requirements provided by direction. As a 
result, they are often seen as an intelligence ‘cycle’, with requirements from 
decision-makers giving direction to collection, analysis and processing with 
the final product being disseminated to decision-makers to meet those 
requirements. The intelligence cycle is visualised at Figure 3.1.

38
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Figure 3.1 – The intelligence core functions and the intelligence cycle23  
3.3. Variations in approach. The core functions provide an approach for how 
to undertake intelligence activity and should be seen as principles that will be 
applied in different forms in different areas of intelligence activity. The UK and 
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) explain these core functions 
with a four-step model, as described in this chapter, although for clarity in 
this publication, the processing step has been subdivided into processing 
and analysis. The United States uses a five-step model, with analysis as a 
separate function from the UK/NATO processing core function. Additionally, 
the intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) community work from a 
five-step model, referred to as task, collect, process, exploit and disseminate 
(TCPED); ISR TCPED can operate as part of, in addition to, or independently 
from the intelligence cycle depending on the situation, and is described in 
greater detail in Chapter 4. The variations on the core approach do not present 
a problem, merely a different emphasis in describing the same activities.
23 This diagram is based on an interpretation of the intelligence cycle by Professor Philip 
Davies from Brunel University.
Direction
Basic intelligence cycle Feedback and dialogue
Collection
Processing
Dissemination
Continuous 
communication 
and review

39
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Section 2 – Direction
3.4. Direction within the intelligence cycle is defined as: the determination of 
intelligence requirements, planning of collection effort, issuance of orders and 
requests to agencies and continuous monitoring of the productivity of such 
agencies.24 Direction is concerned with identifying information requirements, 
assigning priorities to those requirements, and allocating collection capabilities, 
systems and assets25 to meet those requirements. 
3.5. Principal components. In accordance with the commander’s direction, 
the intelligence staff must ensure that intelligence requirements are factored 
into operations and planning staff activities. The collection process is then 
directed by the ISR staff to meet the commander’s requirements. This involves 
the following activities.
a. At the outset of the operations planning process, the commander 
and their staff will begin to formulate questions. More questions will be 
posed and existing questions amended as planning evolves, intelligence 
is received and the subsequent operation develops. These questions, 
many of which fall outside the remit of the intelligence staff, are the 
commander’s critical information requirements (CCIRs). 
b. Ensuring intelligence requirements are captured, processed 
and actioned by the ISR staff for collection and process, exploit and 
disseminate activity.
c. Monitoring intelligence activity to ensure that the right information is 
being collected, analysed and disseminated.
d. Ensuring that intelligence activities are conducted in a timely manner 
and where delays are occurring, re-tasking or reprioritising as required.
e. Planning the production, in combination with intelligence 
requirements management and collection management (IRM&CM).
24 NATOTerm.
25 Allocation of collection capabilities, systems and assets will be undertaken by ISR 
staff, and integrated with operations and plans outputs.

40
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Intelligence and information requirements
3.6. Intelligence and information requirements and priorities are captured 
and communicated in differing ways in different organisations and at levels 
of command. These can be expressed in a number of formats, as described 
below.
3.7. Information requirements. An information requirement is defined as: in 
intelligence usage, information regarding an adversary or potentially hostile 
actors and other relevant aspects of the operational environment that needs 
to be collected and processed to meet the intelligence requirements of a 
commander.26 Information requirements consist of the following.
a. Specific information requirements. A specific information 
requirement is a refined and more specific requirement, which forms 
a component part of a larger intelligence problem. For example, an 
originating information requirement of ‘where will the enemy attack 
from?’, could in a specific information requirement be ‘what capability 
does the enemy have to cross the river on the eastern flank?’.
b. Essential elements of information. CCIRs can be broken down 
into more manageable essential elements of information (EEI), which 
clarify points for collection and analysis. These represent the intelligence 
consumers’ specific requirements. Expressing complex intelligence 
requirements as a collection of EEI provides the additional level of 
guidance needed by intelligence collectors and analysts to create the 
desired effect.
3.8. Intelligence requirements. The portion of the CCIRs that intelligence 
staff will seek to answer are referred to as intelligence requirements. An 
intelligence requirement is defined as: a statement that provides the rationale 
and priority for intelligence activity, as well as the detail to allow the intelligence 
staff to satisfy the requirement in the most effective manner.27 Intelligence 
requirements articulate gaps in knowledge that must be filled or levels of 
understanding that must be maintained so that a commander can conduct 
planning. Intelligence requirements may be further categorised as follows.
a. Priority intelligence requirements. A priority intelligence 
requirement (PIR) is defined as: an intelligence requirement for which 
26 NATOTerm.
27 NATOTerm.

41
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
the commander has an anticipated and stated priority in their task 
of planning and decision-making.28 PIRs are a vital part of the CCIR 
development process and are usually formulated by the intelligence 
staff in close consultation with the commander, and the operations 
and planning staff. PIRs encompass those intelligence requirements 
for which the commander has an anticipated and stated priority for 
enabling planning and decision-making.29 They should be limited in 
number and provide a comprehensive grouping of the main issues. 
They may be enduring or limited to a particular temporal phase or 
situation. PIRs should reference the original question and be written 
specifically to support the commander’s decisions, intent and to focus 
on gaps in understanding. Due to the importance of this intelligence 
to the commander’s decision-making, these questions are designated 
PIRs. PIRs are managed locally, but also shared up and down the chain 
of command, and laterally. The commander should prioritise PIRs and 
keep them under continual review.
b. Specific intelligence requirements. PIRs are supported by more 
detailed specific intelligence requirements (SIRs). An SIR is defined as: 
an intelligence requirement that supports and complements each priority 
intelligence requirement and provides a more detailed description of the 
requirement.30 
3.9. Expressing intelligence requirements. Intelligence requirements should 
be expressed in a clear and concise form. Intelligence requirements should be 
formatted to be: specific, measurable, realistic and timely.
a. Specific. Each intelligence requirement should clearly identify the 
information needed within the context of the commander’s intent. Each 
requirement should outline a specific intelligence need, preferably in a 
single sentence. Multiple questions should be presented as separate 
intelligence requirements.
b. Measurable. It must be possible to determine when a sufficient 
level of confidence in assessment is achieved to consider when an 
intelligence requirement has been filled.
28 NATOTerm.
29 For more information see Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-2.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Intelligence Procedures , paragraph 3.6.
30 NATOTerm.

42
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
c. Realistic. A theoretically achievable intelligence requirement may be 
unrealistic due to capability or collection limitations, including response 
times.
d. Timely. Deadlines associated with each intelligence requirement 
should be clearly stated.
3.10. Requests for information. Where a unit cannot answer an intelligence 
question from within their own data, information and intelligence accesses, a 
request for information (RFI) can be sent to a higher, adjacent or subordinate 
unit, formation or headquarters to ask if they hold relevant information which 
can assist. A formalised RFI management process manages the flow of 
RFIs and responses. On receipt, an RFI manager will check holdings against 
the question and provide an answer back to the RFI originator, including 
nil responses. Where existing information and data is not held, the receiver 
can assign this as an intelligence requirement, which will then go through 
the intelligence requirements management (IRM) process at that level.31 The 
receiving organisation will treat the informing RFI as an intelligence requirement 
(and usually a one-off requirement unless it is a standing task), the only 
difference being that the intelligence requirement is being undertaken on 
behalf of another organisation. This may include onward passage from IRM to 
collection management and generate collection activity where it falls within the 
recipient’s priorities and capacity. Intelligence requirements passed between 
coalition partners are passed as RFIs. A single intelligence requirement may 
generate a number of separate RFIs for different providers. RFIs are not a 
mechanism for directly requesting collection and should not be used as such. 
It should be noted that the term RFI is also widely used outside the intelligence 
specialisation.
Intelligence requirements management and collection 
management
3.11. The definition of IRM&CM is: a set of integrated processes and services 
to manage and satisfy the intelligence requirements by making best use of the 
available collection, processing, exploitation and dissemination capabilities. 32 
IRM&CM is often seen as the point of contact between direction and collection 
phases of the intelligence cycle, but it is an ongoing activity throughout 
31 Where possible, intelligence architectures should be as transparent as possible, which  
ensures relevant data, information and intelligence can be discovered at every level. This 
greatly reduces the volume of RFIs required.
32 NATOTerm.

43
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
the cycle. To provide robust management during the intelligence process 
it is essential to have a coherent and focused ability for providing effective 
direction. Within the direction stage of the intelligence process, IRM is the main 
internal activity and provides the linkage to collection management, which 
sits outside of the intelligence cycle and within the ISR process.33 IRM&CM 
provides a central focus for the management of all intelligence and operational 
requirements for ISR. It harnesses the collection and processing capabilities 
by translating cognitive intelligence tasks into physical collection tasks where a 
collector can be applied against a problem located in time, space and on the 
electromagnetic spectrum. The roles of IRM&CM are to:
• synchronise intelligence collection and processing, exploitation and 
dissemination efforts;34
• ensure maximum advantage is made of collection and processing, 
exploitation and dissemination capabilities;
• coordinate the tasking, processing, exploitation, analysis and 
dissemination of intelligence, including accesses to it, using the 
underlying tenets of ‘duty to share’ and ‘collect once and use often’;
• integrate intelligence into planning procedures across Defence; and
• manage collaboration with partners at all levels. 
3.12. Intelligence requirements management. IRM is defined as: the 
management function that develops, validates and prioritizes intelligence 
requirements, forwards validated intelligence requirements to the collection 
management function, and oversees dissemination of the intelligence 
products.35 The IRM staff have the following responsibilities.
a. Assess an intelligence requirement’s relative priority, based on the 
commander’s intent, direction and the PIRs.
33 IRM&CM is practised at every level and provides the mechanism for seeking intelligence 
and collection from higher, lateral and subordinates formations. While best practice dictates 
a separation of the function between J2 and ISR staff at the tactical level where there are few 
organic collection capabilities, the functions may be compressed into one cell.
34 In this sense, intelligence collection refers to how the intelligence staff source finished 
intelligence on which they can base their assessments. Intelligence is not collected; 
data and information are collected and it only becomes intelligence when it has been 
processed, exploited and disseminated.
35 NATOTerm.

44
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
b. Search existing databases and publications to negate unnecessary 
collection or processing activity if an answer to the intelligence 
requirement already exists. This includes submission of RFIs to higher, 
lateral and subordinate levels who may hold data, information and 
intelligence.
c. Determine if the intelligence requirements constitute a valid gap and 
require tasking of collection capabilities. 
d. Convert cognitive intelligence requirements into EEI that can be 
answered by collection. IRMs state EEI in terms of an effect required. 
IRMs should not request specific assets, platforms or sensors. To help 
coordinate and monitor intelligence requirements, the IRM staff produce 
an intelligence collection plan.
e. Track the task until completion or rejection and keep the demander 
informed on its status. If there is doubt as to whether the timescale 
can be met, the intelligence requirements manager will consult the 
demander to ask if a later delivery is acceptable or if the task should be 
cancelled, thereby releasing assets for other tasks.
f. Disseminate results to the demander. Once a task has been 
completed, the resulting information and intelligence is usually sent 
directly to the demander and the only involvement by an intelligence 
requirements manager is consultation with both the producer and 
demander to ensure that the remit has or will be met. Resulting 
intelligence is placed in a database to be searched against for 
subsequent intelligence requirements and made available to as wide  
an audience as possible.
3.13. Collection management. Collection management is defined as: in 
intelligence usage, the process of satisfying collection requirements by tasking, 
requesting or coordinating with appropriate collection sources of agencies, 
monitoring results and re-tasking, as required.36 Collection management 
operates independently from the IRM process with collection management 
directly supporting both the intelligence cycle and operations cycle. It is often 
required to balance competing requirements between the two. Collection 
management optimises the deployment and tasking of finite collection resources 
to meet demands from all users and requesters. It matches EEIs to the most 
appropriate available collector, accounting for the type of outcome required.
36 NATOTerm.

45
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
The Royal Marine Surveillance and Reconnaissance Squadron exercise deploying from  
a Royal Navy submarine in Northern Norway
3.14. Intelligence collection plan. Operations place an enormous demand on 
collection, processing, exploitation and dissemination capabilities. Information 
is required to support situational awareness, force protection, target acquisition 
and battle damage assessment. There is a risk that the associated collection 
tasks are undertaken at the expense of sustaining the intelligence process 
and the longer view. An intelligence collection plan is a support tool to assist 
the IRM staff in producing, completing and monitoring unfinished intelligence 
requirements.37 It articulates the priorities and constraints for each intelligence 
requirement. In the intelligence collection plan, the IRM staff deconstruct 
intelligence requirements into their constituent priority or enduring intelligence 
requirements and EEIs.
3.15. Review of the intelligence collection plan. IRM staff should continuously 
review the intelligence collection plan, monitoring the productivity of sources and 
agencies. It should be distributed to higher, lower and lateral levels of command, 
including multinational partners, to inform them and facilitate coordination.
37 Although ‘intelligence collection plan’ is the commonly used term, ‘intelligence 
requirements plan’ more accurately reflects what the intelligence collection plan is – 
essentially a cognitive analytical tool for breaking down complex intelligence problems into 
more manageable components. 

46
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Indicators and warnings
3.16. Indicators. Before beginning the process of designing an intelligence 
collection plan, the intelligence staff must identify the indicators that are 
appropriate to the particular operation or threat. Selecting indicators that are 
appropriate to the operational situation is the responsibility of the intelligence 
staff. The nature of the indicators that they select will inform the intelligence 
collection plan. Indicators are normally categorised under three headings. 38
a. Alert or warning indicators. These relate to preparations by 
an adversary for offensive action. At the strategic level, this could 
include the collapse of negotiations or issue of ultimatums, while at 
the operational level it could include the resupply or redeployment of 
adversary capabilities.
b. Tactical or combat indicators. These reveal the type of operation 
the adversary is about to conduct. Indicators linked to these 
preparations can potentially be defined well in advance and must be 
reflected in the PIRs. For example, tactical indicators could include the 
increasing number of naval ships in port or weapons purchases by 
insurgents.
c. Identification indicators. Identification indicators are those that 
enable the identity and role of a formation, unit, installation or irregular 
adversary grouping to be determined from its order of battle, equipment 
and tactics.
3.17. Strategic warning problems. Defence Intelligence maintains a set of 
strategic ‘warning problems’ as part of its indicators and warnings enterprise. 
38 Indicators and warnings is defined as:  intelligence activities to detect and report 
time-sensitive information on developments that could threaten the multinational force, 
including forewarning of adversaries’ intentions or actions, insurgency, terrorism and other 
similar events. Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to 
NATOTerm.
Military men look for three surefire clues that an enemy force is 
preparing to attack. Is it moving its artillery forward? Is it laying down 
communications? Is it reinforcing its forces logistically, with stocks 
for fuel and ammunition? By 31 July [1990] all three conditions were 
present in southern Iraq.
Colin Powell, A Soldier’s Way, An Autobiography
“

47
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Using formal methodology, these monitor critical indicators for scenarios that 
would have negative implications for Defence and the wider UK government. 
Defence Intelligence publishes ‘warning reports’ when there are changes 
to critical indicators, or in response to customer requests. The purpose of 
establishing a ‘warning problem’ is to focus attention, collection and analysis 
on a specific threat and to monitor it closely for a potentially indefinite period. 
Warning problems use indicator-based methodology to provide a framework 
for detecting changes or anomalies in activity that would raise or lower the 
level of concern. This level of concern is expressed as a ‘watch condition’. 
Warning problems are deactivated upon the threat having completely subsided 
or the warning issue coming to pass.
Section 3 – Collection
3.18. Collection may be described as the gathering and exploitation of data 
and information by specialists and agencies and the delivery of the results 
obtained to the appropriate processing unit for use in the production of 
intelligence.39 It comprises search, retrieval and receipt of data, information 
and intelligence from external sources. Collection within the intelligence cycle 
does not refer to the application of sensors and collection capabilities against 
requirements; this falls within the ISR TCPED process. Collection refers to the 
harvesting of the results and outputs from the ISR process and other sources 
for use by intelligence staff and analysts.
3.19. Sources. A source is defined in NATO as: in intelligence usage, a person 
from whom or thing from which information can be obtained.40 The UK has 
a broader interpretation of the term ‘source’, which includes processes and 
systems. There are three types of sources: controlled, uncontrolled and casual. 
a. Controlled. Controlled sources are people, processes and systems 
that are under direct control of an intelligence agency or organisation, 
specifically nominated intelligence staff, or under the control of an 
organisation, headquarters or headquarters hierarchy in which the 
intelligence staff reside.
b. Uncontrolled. Uncontrolled sources are those not under formal 
command and control of a suitably empowered headquarters. The 
term largely refers to external third party sources such as the media 
39 This is also a proposed definition awaiting agreement by NATO.
40 NATOTerm.

48
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
and other nations’ intelligence apparatus. Information provided by 
uncontrolled sources is treated with caution as it may be intended to 
deceive or influence. 
c. Casual sources. Casual sources, such as defectors or refugees, 
provide unsolicited information. Such information is always treated 
with caution, as it may be intended to deceive or influence. Specialist 
personnel are trained to assess a casual source’s reliability.41
3.20. Agencies. An agency is defined as: in intelligence usage, an organization 
or individual engaged in collecting and/or processing information.42 An agency is 
different from a source because a source produces raw data while an agency, 
which has a collection capability, also possesses some degree of processing 
capability and can provide intelligence. Agencies can be national (for example, 
Secret Intelligence Service) or multinational (for example, NATO).
3.21. Agency and source selection. Selection of a source or agency for a 
particular task is the responsibility of the collection management staff. The 
collection management staff will need to consider the following.
a. Security. Sources must be adequately protected unless, in 
exceptional circumstances, a decision is taken that the operational 
benefits of not doing so outweigh the likely consequences to the 
intelligence effort. Failure to protect sources will result in either the loss 
of the source or its compromise.
b. Capability. An agency tasked to collect an item of information or 
produce data, information or intelligence must be capable of doing so. 
It must possess the appropriate sensor, platform, collection opportunity 
and processing capability.
c. Suitability. There will be occasions when more than one type of 
source or agency may be capable of carrying out a collection task. The 
collection management staff will consider the attributes of each asset to 
ensure that the most appropriate is chosen.
d. Risk. There will often be an element of physical, political or military 
risk involved in employing a particular source or agency. The risk 
involved must be weighed against the value of the information sought.
41 These personnel receive special training in the legal implications of their actions.
42 NATOTerm.

49
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
e. Engagement space. External factors within the engagement space 
may limit the ability of a source or agency to collect information. Such 
factors include, for example, political constraints, weather or terrain. 
f. Balance of tasking. Balance is achieved by an even distribution 
of the collection workload across the range of available sources and 
agencies. Although this is desirable, it is not always practical given 
limited collection assets and the need to prioritise.
g. Timelines. The commander’s deadline is critical. Collection 
management staff must ensure that sources and agencies selected to 
meet a collection requirement will be able to achieve the task before the 
deadline.
Relationship between the intelligence cycle and intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance
3.22. The ISR process is synchronised with the intelligence and operations 
cycles. Although the ISR process is frequently aligned with the collection 
and processing phases of the intelligence cycle, it is not exclusively aligned, 
especially where ISR assets are supporting operations directly and in real time. 
Figure 3.2 illustrates the alignment of the ISR process and the intelligence and 
decision cycles. 
Figure 3.2 – Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance  
synchronisation and integration43
43 AJP-2.7, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance , 
Figure 1.2.
JISR synchronisation
JISR process
JISR integration
Direction
Dissemination
Collection
Processing
Plan
Assess
Direct
Monitor
JISR results
Collection
requirements
Task
Collect
Process
Exploit
Disseminate
Intelligence
cycle
Decision
cycle

50
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
3.23. Selection of collection assets – tasking. Resource tasking is 
described as the activity undertaken to select the most appropriate ISR 
resource types for which tasking authority has been allocated. This process 
occurs outside of the intelligence cycle as part of collection management 
in the ISR cycle. Collection managers select assets according to suitability 
and availability rather than ownership. For tasks involving complex targets, 
multiple collection capabilities may be necessary to satisfy a single collection 
requirement. Collection managers will collaborate closely with resource owners 
to identify the most appropriate assets to meet the collection requirement. In 
some instances, it may be preferable to modify the constraints of the collection 
requirement to match an available asset rather than pass an unachievable 
collection requirement to another organisation. In addition to knowledge 
of dedicated ISR assets and non-dedicated ISR assets organic to their 
organisation, collection managers should have a thorough understanding of 
assets within other operational domains and components, higher, national or 
allied organisations, and the process to task them. 
3.24. The intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance collection 
requirements list. The collection requirements list (CRL) is generated by 
the collection management staff and integrates requirements from both the 
operations staff and the intelligence staff. It aims to match requirements with 
specific collection assets and directly supports the intelligence collection plan 
and the operational and targeting requirements. Having determined which 
assets best suit the task, collection management staff allocate the appropriate 
resources on a priority basis. 
3.25. Allocation of collection assets. Coordination is required to prioritise 
competing demands on the same collection capability. Coordination also 
ensures coherence between the collection and alternative functions of 
dual-role or multi-role assets.
3.26. Multinational assets. The pooling of multinational ISR assets and 
their control by a central collection management organisation, using NATO or 
locally established procedures, ensure effective operation. Nations’ individual 
interests and release issues may constrain interoperability, but a coalition-wide 
community of interest promotes collaboration and access to wider collection 
capabilities.

51
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Carrier Strike Group 21 operations required shared understanding between allies
Multiple-source intelligence and multidisciplinary intelligence 
3.27 . A source is a line of reporting such as a human agent or intercepted 
communications channel. A discipline represents a method or technique of 
collection (for example, human intelligence or signals intelligence). One may 
have multiple sources from a single discipline, such as more than one agent or 
a number of decrypted ciphers. Therefore, multidisciplinary intelligence fuses 
information drawn from more than one source or from across two or more 
collection disciplines. Multiple-source intelligence is defined as: the deliberate 
application of two or more discrete but supporting intelligence disciplines, 
seeking to improve the quality of the intelligence product.44 Note: supporting 
intelligence disciplines include, for example, geospatial intelligence, human 
intelligence and signals intelligence. 
3.28. Corroboration. Devoting time and effort to corroboration during 
intelligence collection activities increases certainty and reduces risk. 
Corroboration is achieved by comparing intelligence derived from one source 
with that derived from at least one other source so that common features or 
contradictions can be identified. 
44 This is a modified definition and will be updated in JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology 
Supplement to NATOTerm.

52
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
3.29. Fusion. Multiple-source intelligence will often have a higher degree of 
confidence than single-source intelligence, but deception staff now recognise 
this and will plan multiple-source deception. To gain additional benefit, 
intelligence staff should fuse material, blending intelligence and information 
from multiple feeds, including open sources, into a coherent picture. The 
adoption of such practices disguises the source of the material, which may 
also allow the product to have a lower protective marking, thus enabling wider 
dissemination. Intelligence staff must advise recipients when intelligence is 
uncorroborated.
Section 4 – Processing 
3.30. Processing and analysis. Processing is defined as: the conversion of 
information into intelligence through collation, evaluation, analysis, integration 
and interpretation.45 Processing is the function of the intelligence cycle in 
which collected information and data is converted into intelligence to meet 
intelligence requirements. For clarity in this doctrine, it has been subdivided 
into processing and analysis, with the processing steps describing how 
information is made usable for the analyst and the analysis steps covering 
how the analyst then makes this valuable for the customer. Both steps 
must occur to achieve the overall aim. Processing and analysis are iterative 
and may generate further collection requirements before the intelligence is 
disseminated.
3.31. Doctrinal approaches. As outlined above, there are variations in how 
the core functions of the intelligence cycle are expressed, particularly around 
processing. NATO describes processing as the conversion of information 
into intelligence through collation, evaluation, analysis, integration and 
interpretation. Along with some nations, this approach means processing and 
analysis are treated as a single topic under ‘processing’, while other nations 
treat them separately. This publication is consistent with the NATO view of 
a single overarching function, while emphasising different steps in how to 
45 NATOTerm.
True genius resides in the capacity for the evaluation of uncertain, 
hazardous, and conflicting information.
 
Sir Winston Churchill
“

53
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
achieve it. Analysts should be conscious of the differences in terminology 
when collaborating with colleagues in other organisations.
3.32. Uncertainty. One of the defining characteristics of intelligence analysis 
as a whole is the need to deal with uncertainty. Uncertainty is present at 
every stage of the intelligence cycle, but it is most prevalent in processing and 
analysis. Uncertainty may arise from:
• incomplete, ambiguous, conflicting or potentially incorrect 
information;
• the presence of subjectivity or bias in the source material;
• the presence of subjectivity or bias in how information is treated by 
analysts and customers;
• the extent to which the information is knowable; and
• the potential for denial and deception.
The impact of uncertainty is exacerbated when dealing with future-focused 
requirements as these examine events that have yet to occur and may 
therefore still change. Futures analysis can enable more timely, effective and 
comprehensive preparation for a variety of futures, including high-impact 
events, and it is therefore extremely valuable for decision-makers. However, 
it requires particular care because of the greater reliance on assumptions 
to fill gaps, making it more susceptible to subjective thinking and cognitive 
bias. In all cases, it is important for analysts to understand and address 
sources of uncertainty so that their analysis is as rigorous as possible and 
decision-makers receive the best quality intelligence for their requirement. 
This can be assisted by drawing on a wide range of sources and collection 
disciplines, consciously thinking both creatively and critically, and being open 
to constructive challenge.
3.33. Structured analytical techniques. Structured analytical techniques 
(SATs)46 are methods of organising and stimulating thinking about intelligence 
problems and they can be useful tools for understanding and addressing 
uncertainty. Their use has been increasingly championed since prominent 
intelligence failures and the subsequent investigations, such as the Butler and 
46 ‘Structured analytical techniques’ as a term is not formally defined but it is commonly 
abbreviated to SATs.

54
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Chilcot inquiries.47 These highlighted the difficulties of unaided judgements and 
lack of transparency, leading to the promotion of SATs and their inclusion in 
professional standards and training. 
a. Benefits. The benefits of SATs can be summarised as promoting 
the following.
 o Conscious and deliberate thinking – SATs compel users 
to actively think about information, including evidence, 
assumptions and judgements, rather than relying on intuition or 
mental shortcuts that are more susceptible to bias.
 o Structured and systematic thinking – SATs provide frameworks 
to assist users in thinking logically, consistently and broadly, 
minimising the risk of overlooking or missing steps and/or 
information.
 o Transparency of thinking – SATs expose normally opaque, 
internal cognitive processes, making them transparent and 
external and therefore easier to understand and examine.
b. Complementary uses. As a result of these benefits, SATs have 
multiple complementary uses when applied in processing and analysis 
activities. However, it is important to note that they assist, rather than 
replace, human reasoning. As such, they are tools to aid the analyst’s 
creative and critical thinking, not a substitute for that thinking, and they 
will not provide ‘answers’ in their own right. SATs assist in the following. 
 o Mitigating bias – making thinking conscious and systematic 
reduces the probability of errors caused by cognitive biases 
such as anchoring, confirmation bias or groupthink.
 o Enabling testing and challenge – exposing the rationale behind 
judgements allows the analyst to check their own thinking and 
facilitates constructive external challenge, thereby strengthening 
rigour.
47 The Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction  and The Report of the 
Iraq Inquiry respectively.

55
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
How and when to apply SATs in Defence Intelligence can be found 
in Defence Intelligence’s Quick Wins for Busy Analysts and other UK 
government products, such as the GOScience Futures Toolkit. The 
application of SATs is also taught on various Defence Intelligence and 
Professional Head of Intelligence Analysis (PHIA) training courses. Further 
academic and commercial literature is also available.
 o Organising and planning – the structured frameworks can help 
identify what information is known, what is assumed and where 
there are gaps. This aids interpretation and evaluation, enables 
collection requirements to be prioritised and makes subsequent 
analysis more efficient.
 o Improve impact on decision-makers – the outputs of analysis 
may be more positively received if consumers see and 
understand how they are justified.
 o Supporting quality assurance processes – the structure and 
transparency provided by SATs facilitates review by supervisors.
 o Providing an audit trail – SATs can form part of the audit trail, 
capturing the intellectual reasoning underpinning a judgement 
in a way that can be replicated later if required.
 o Enabling sharing and information knowledge management – 
SATs provide a common framework in which reasoning can be 
easily updated and shared with peers, including forming part of 
the handover between analysts.
Processing and analysis – subordinate functions
3.34. Processing and analysis can each be broken into three subordinate 
functions, as illustrated in Figure 3.3. Processing consists of collation, 
interpretation and evaluation, and analysis comprises synthesis, assessment 
and production.

56
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Figure 3.3 – Processing and analysis
Processing
3.35. Contemporary collection platforms and systems produce vast volumes 
of data, but all are still operating in the presence of denial, deception and the 
‘noise’ of cluttered environments. Rarely can the information and data acquired 
during collection be understood without considerable effort. Processing forms 
the interface between collection and analysis, and between the ISR process 
and the intelligence cycle. The ISR process collects, processes and exploits 
data before disseminating it to the processing and analysis phase of the 
intelligence cycle. This ensures potentially highly technical data is presented 
in a useable form for subsequent usage. A further stage of processing may, 
however, be required within the intelligence cycle to enable analysis, for 
example, the translation of reports into a common format and their storage in a 
common location. 
3.36. Components. Processing within the intelligence cycle consists of 
collation, interpretation and evaluation. Both interpretation and evaluation 
depend on collation, but the three components are not necessarily conducted 
in a specific sequence, and are often developed in parallel as the data and 
information are examined and reviewed.
3.37. Collation. Collation is defined as: in intelligence usage, an activity in the 
processing phase of the intelligence cycle in which the grouping together of 
related items of information provides a record of events and facilitates further 
processing.48 Collation draws together information from disparate sources that 
are relevant to the same intelligence requirement. It establishes the foundation 
for both interpretation and evaluation by providing a structure in which the 
48 NATOTerm.
Processing
and analysis
Processing
Interpretation EvaluationCollation
Analysis
Assessment ProductionSynthesis

57
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
information gathered can be contextualised and cross-referenced and, in 
doing so, underpins analysis. This structure records what information was 
available at a given time, where it originated and its classification, minimising 
the risk of information getting missed or mishandled. By incorporating the 
results of interpretation and evaluation, it can also capture the value assigned 
to different information rather than simply its presence, further supporting the 
analysis phase. As such, it forms the basis of a strong audit trail by recording 
the extent to which information was used in generating a specific intelligence 
output and what influenced this. Collation involves receiving and recording 
all incoming information and intelligence, then grouping them appropriately. 
This is applicable to intelligence activity at all levels, with groups or categories 
determined by the intelligence requirements and type of operation. At its 
simplest, collation may involve no more than the maintenance of a log or a 
marked map or chart. However, it is increasingly common to use electronic 
databases due to the nature and volume of information and the need to sustain 
the system across multiple sites or for longer durations. In the future, collation 
systems should grow in sophistication in line with collection and analysis 
practices, linking to graphic interfaces and making more use of automation. In 
all cases, the collation process must be monitored and maintained to ensure it 
is carried out rapidly, efficiently and in line with legal and security requirements.
3.38. Interpretation. Interpretation is defined as: in intelligence usage, an 
activity in the processing phase of the intelligence cycle during which the 
significance of information or intelligence is judged in relation to the current 
body of knowledge.49 Interpretation extracts meaning from collection products 
so they can be fully and appropriately used during the analysis phase. These 
products may have been partially processed electronically beforehand, 
such as the conversion of ‘raw’ technical data into imagery or searchable 
databases. Interpretation goes beyond this though to draw out the relevance 
of information for later analysis. Technical data acquired from electromagnetic 
intelligence, imagery or measurement and signature intelligence must be 
converted into a form that non-specialist consumers can understand. 
Intercepted communications may need to be decrypted, or translated if in a 
different language, and potentially further clarification and explanation added 
if the subject matter is highly technical. A human source may witness activity 
such as a movement of vehicles or equipment that they can describe but not 
identify. This may be meaningless to them but could provide an important 
indication for warning intelligence if interpreted appropriately. Similarly, objects 
observed on imagery require interpretation to identify them and enable further 
analysis. The increasing availability of data, particularly from open sources, 
49 NATOTerm.

58
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
means interpretation is vital for understanding what the data is telling us about 
and therefore what it can add to analysis of a subject. Effective interpretation 
may rely on specialists with subject matter-specific or technical expertise and 
methods (including data scientists, linguists, etc.) but can also be achieved by 
using prior experience or other information for context.
3.39. Evaluation. Evaluation is defined as: in intelligence usage, an activity in 
the processing phase of the intelligence cycle consisting in an appraisal of the 
quality of the reported information, which is key to determining the reliability 
of the originator or source and the credibility of the information.50 Evaluation is 
vital for all aspects of intelligence analysis because it determines the weight 
that can be placed on a specific source and its reporting when forming analytic 
judgements. Sources must be evaluated for the accuracy and trustworthiness 
of their information, an activity sometimes referred to as validation. Every 
form of intelligence collection has limitations in terms of coverage and 
accuracy. Coverage may be limited by technical constraints, opportunity and 
an adversary’s operations security and other denial measures. Inaccuracy 
can arise from sensor artefacts, human error and cognitive bias during 
interpretation. Moreover, all collection activities are susceptible to the risk of 
detection by an adversary’s counter-intelligence measures and, consequently, 
deception as well as denial. It is vital, therefore, to evaluate whether the 
interpretation of a collection product can be trusted or if it is somehow 
erroneous or misleading. The main considerations in conducting evaluation are 
therefore the reliability of the source, the credibility of the information and the 
requirement to review and re-evaluate previously evaluated sources.
a. Reliability of the source. This concerns the level of trust or 
confidence that can be placed on the source of the information. For 
human sources, it is necessary to consider their motivation, expertise 
and level of access. This includes organisational sources such as media 
platforms as well as individual human sources. Judgements of reliability 
in human and organisational sources largely depend on the reporting 
history of the source in terms of accuracy and correlation with other 
sources over time. These need to be continually reviewed and updated, 
especially for new indications of adversary influence or control. For 
technical sources, reliability relates to the operational capabilities and 
limitations of a system. Regular review is also necessary to identify if 
capabilities are degrading due to age or system faults and to ensure that 
the source is not being systematically manipulated by an adversary, for 
50 NATOTerm.

59
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
example, through the use of signals that take advantage of a collection 
system’s specific capabilities and characteristics.
b. Credibility of the information. This concerns the level of trust or 
confidence that can be placed on the information or specific reporting 
from the source. Credibility of reports can be evaluated in isolation, 
internally by identifying content that is factually incorrect or logically 
implausible, or externally by considering outside influences on the 
collection effort, such as weather or the electromagnetic environment 
for technical sources. However, credibility is usually best assessed by 
corroborating with other sources that may confirm or disconfirm the 
substance of that report. Corroboration is important when making 
analytic judgements, but care should be taken to mitigate against bias. 
Contradictory information should still be evaluated and analysed, not 
discarded simply because it is different, and operators must be alert to 
the possibility of circular reporting.
c. Review and re-evaluation. Reliability and credibility must be 
evaluated separately. A previously reliable source may still provide 
inaccurate information through sincere error or coming under hostile 
control, and occasionally highly credible information can come from a 
usually unreliable source. It is also good practice to review evaluated 
sources to avoid confirmation bias, as information initially deemed 
improbable through lack of corroboration could become more credible. 
Alternatively, credible reporting could be placed in doubt, as additional 
information is received.
3.40. Intelligence grading. Intelligence grading refers to the process used 
to provide a commonly understood way of describing initial evaluations of the 
reliability of a source and the credibility of the information. As well as an initial 
evaluation, gradings should be reviewed as further intelligence is acquired 
to update evaluation judgements about both the source and their reporting, 
especially if the source is liable to produce additional reporting. Additionally, 
the grading of a source and its reporting may also need to be reviewed when 
examined in a wider context or with deeper subject matter expertise during the 
analysis phase. Whilst the NATO Intelligence Grading System is widely used, 
other approaches are also possible.
a. NATO Intelligence Grading System. This framework is sometimes 
referred to as the ‘Admiralty Code’ and is shown at Table 3.1. It 
captures the separate judgements of reliability and credibility in a single 

60
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
alphanumeric digraph with reliability graded from A to F and credibility 
from 1 to 6. A usually reliable source providing improbable information 
would result in B5, and confirmed information from an unreliable source 
would be E1. The two ratings do not need to ‘match’ on the scales (for 
example, B2 or E5). It is also important to note that a grading of F6 (or 
either element separately) does not render the information useless or 
mean it has no value. It simply means that there is insufficient internal 
evidence or independent confirmation to make a judgement on reliability 
and/or credibility and the analyst will have to evaluate the information 
themselves in the context of their requirement. 
Reliability of the source Credibility of the information
A     Completely reliable 1     Confirmed by other sources
B     Usually reliable 2     Probably true
C     Fairly reliable 3     Possibly true
D     Not usually reliable 4     Doubtful
E     Unreliable 5     Improbable
F     Reliability cannot be judged 6     Truth cannot be judged
Table 3.1 – The NATO Intelligence Grading System 
b. Alternative approaches to intelligence grading. Different 
organisations may use different forms of grading that may be variations 
on the ‘Admiralty Code’ or be significantly different, such as being 
limited to a broad description of the nature of the source, its level and 
quality of access and some sense of its reporting history. It is especially 
important in the integrated environment to have a good understanding 
of the evaluation methods and standards used by other agencies, and 
particularly allies and partners. 
Analysis
3.41. Analysis is defined as: in intelligence usage, an activity in the processing 
phase of the intelligence cycle in which information is subjected to review in 
order to identify significant facts for subsequent interpretation.51 Analysis turns 
processed information into intelligence that has value for decision-makers. 
It reduces uncertainty for decision-makers in terms of what is happening or 
51 NATOTerm.

61
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
may happen next by determining the significance of processed information 
against specific requirements and purposes. Analysis can be focused on past, 
present or future events, or a combination, so analysts must consider what 
the decision-maker intends to use the intelligence for when determining their 
approach. For example, a range of potential outcomes may be more valuable 
and less risky for planning activities than a single, specific prediction. Similarly, 
this range of potential outcomes may be sufficient for general long-term 
planning but may need to be developed into sets of indicators and warnings 
for monitoring specific threats. While some commanders’/decision-makers’ 
requirements can be met by single source analysis, most requirements 
will benefit from reference to other sources to increase corroboration and 
confidence. As a rule, analysis should therefore draw on as wide a range of 
sources and collection disciplines as is required to meet information needs 
whilst minimising the risk of deception.
3.42. Analysis – components. Analysis consists of synthesis, assessment 
and production. Synthesis and assessment may take place separately or 
together in the mind of the individual analyst. They should also link back to 
processing as gaps are revealed or information needs to be re-evaluated in 
the light of links identified. While production naturally forms the last stage, it is 
good practice to plan production in parallel with other activities for efficiency 
and to keep focused on the commander’s/customer’s requirements. Synthesis 
and assessment are principally human cognitive functions, depending on 
creative thinking to address gaps in information or understanding and critical 
thinking to assess implications for the requirement. Analysts should remain 
aware of, and consciously address, the impact these personal and subjective 
intellectual functions may have on their judgements. As described earlier, 
SATs are useful methods for improving rigour in synthesis and assessment by 
mitigating bias, adding structure and enabling challenge.
3.43. Synthesis. Synthesis (also referred to as ‘integration’) is the basis of 
sound analysis, assembling the core pieces of the intelligence picture. During 
this step, analysts make sense of the body of processed information available 
to them (as opposed to interpretation, which is more about making sense of 
individual pieces of unprocessed information). This should normally be done 
in the context of an SIR but it is also applicable when producing a general 
summary for situational awareness. Synthesis is achieved by identifying links, 
patterns and anomalies in the processed information, resulting in descriptive 
explanations of what something does, how it works, what is happening in 
a situation, etc. As such, it can be an end in its own right, generating basic 
and current intelligence (see paragraph 2.14 a–b). However, it can also be 

62
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
used to underpin assessments depending on the intelligence requirement. 
For example, synthesis may result in an order of battle of adversary forces for 
reference purposes, but this may later become vital to a net assessment of the 
balance of forces between two belligerent parties.
3.44. Assessment. Assessment builds on synthesis to answer the linked 
questions of ‘so what?’, ‘what next?’ and ‘what if?’. It involves making 
judgements about what the explanations mean for customers in the context 
of their SIR, providing insight and foresight. This is often associated with 
predictive analysis, but also includes judgements about the implications of a 
subject (for example, a particular capability, situation or event) for a decision. 
The two primary considerations for analysts in conducting assessment are 
probability and their level of analytical confidence. PHIA methodologies 
to support analysts conducting this work are described in detail in 
paragraphs 3.46–3.48.
a. Probability. Since assessments are generated using incomplete, 
potentially unreliable and/or unknowable information, judgements 
should include the probability that each hypothesis is true or that 
outcomes (future hypotheses or scenarios) will occur. Factors 
influencing this probability are the frequency of comparable events, the 
strength and reliability of related indicators, the reliability and credibility 
of the source material (source confidence), and the extent of coverage.
b. Analytical confidence. Judgements are inherently subjective, 
introducing further uncertainty from the impact of individuals’ cognitive 
biases. Actively challenging judgements, exploring alternatives and 
seeking to disprove rather than confirm can improve confidence in 
the assessment as a whole, increasing its value to a decision-maker. 
The use of appropriate analytical standards and methods is essential 
to ensuring that judgements are rigorous and justifiable, including by 
providing an audit trail of decisions that underpin them.
3.45. Production. Production captures the results of synthesis and, where 
appropriate, assessment in forms that will clearly and effectively communicate 
those results and judgements to decision-makers. Production lies on the 
interface between processing and dissemination, and is integral to making 
analysis truly valuable to customers. Production may result in verbal briefings, 
textual reports and/or audiovisual digital media, whichever is most appropriate 
for the principal customer, and other collateral customers if required. These 
may be stand-alone products, updates or part of a series. Regardless of 

63
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
format, it is essential to provide assurance that processing and analysis has 
achieved its purpose of meeting intelligence requirements and has delivered 
valuable, impactful support to decision-makers. The following checks have 
different but related purposes and, depending on resources and time, can be 
conducted by the analyst, peers, supervisors/managers or by independent 
challenge, or through a combination. They can occur in any order, and 
separately or concurrently but they need to address each of the three 
purposes.
a. Check the analysis against the requirement, considering the needs, 
knowledge and position of the intelligence consumer. This should 
include practicalities such as classification, form and format, but should 
focus on whether the output will have the desired impact.
b. Check the analytical reasoning to make sure that the analysis and 
judgements being conveyed are logical and justifiable, supported by 
evidence wherever possible and with clear rationale for why alternative 
outcomes were rejected.
c. Check for clarity, ensuring that facts/evidence, assumptions and 
judgements are sufficiently differentiated and uncertainty appropriately 
communicated, including key remaining gaps. This ensures not only 
that intelligence analysis is understood by the consumer, but also 
cannot be misunderstood.
Analysis and production standards
3.46. The Professional Head of Intelligence Assessment Analytic 
Standards. The PHIA Analytic Standards set expectations and best practice 
for how analysis and assessment should be conducted. These are mandated 
for use by all-source analysts working across Defence, but they will also be 
useful for staff working in other disciplines. The eight standards shown in 
Figure 3.4 direct that analysis and assessment should be independent, clear, 
comprehensive, auditable, relevant, rigorous, objective and timely, primarily 
covering activities in the processing and analysis stage of the intelligence cycle. 
Within this, they are most directly applicable to synthesis and assessment, but 
are also valuable as part of the quality assurance conducted under production. 

64
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Figure 3.4 – Professional Head of Intelligence Analytic Standards
3.47. Probability yardsticks. Accurate depiction of probability is key in the 
production of analytical judgements. All intelligence products provided to 
consumers of intelligence must convey explicitly the probability of this event 
or events occurring. To avoid miscommunication between the analyst and the 
consumer of intelligence, Defence mandates the use of the PHIA Probability 
Yardsticks shown at Table 3.2 and Figure 3.5 for subjective probability 
judgements. This provides a standardised set of probabilistic language that 
equate to numeric ranges, making it clear what is meant by different terms so 
that consumers interpret the terms as the analyst intended. The Probability 
Yardstick is intended for the communication of probability only, not analytic 
confidence, and it is expected that analysts arrive at their probabilistic 
judgement using suitable robust methods.


65
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Probability range Judgement terms Friction range
≤ ≈5% Remote chance ≤ ≈1/20
≈10% – ≈20% Highly unlikely ≈1/10 – ≈1/5
≈25% – ≈35% Unlikely ≈1/4 – ≈1/3
≈40% – < 50% Realistic possibility ≈4/10 – < 1/2
≈55% – ≈75% Likely or Probably ≈4/7 – ≈3/4
≈80% – ≈90% Highly likely ≈4/5 – ≈9/10
≥ ≈95% Almost certain ≥ ≈19/20
≈ approximately equal to     ≥ is greater than or equal to      ≤ is less than or equal to  
< is less than
Table 3.2 – Defence Intelligence and Professional Head of Intelligence 
Assessment Probability Yardstick
Figure 3.5 – Defence Intelligence and Professional Head of Intelligence 
Assessment Probability Yardstick
3.48. Analytical confidence. An expression of analytical confidence can 
be described as a statement on the extent to which there is determined to 
be a sound and stable basis for assessing the probability of an occurrence 
taking place. The PHIA standard for evaluating and communicating 
analytical confidence is to be used by all-source analysts across Defence. 
If assessments of analytical confidence are to be made or communicated, 
they must use the standardised form of words and supporting criteria, rather 
than any local alternative. However, unlike the Probability Yardstick, it is not 
mandated for all assessments, with organisations free to choose which 
0
0%
1/4
25%
1/2
50%
3/4
75%
1
100%
5% 10% 20% 35% 40% 55% 80% 90% 95%
Almost
certain
Highly
likely
Likely or
probable
Realistic
possibilityUnlikelyHighly
unlikely
Remote
chance
Probability Yardstick

66
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
activities and products it applies to. Analytical confidence is divided into three 
categories, each of which comprise different sets of criteria for evaluation.
• Information base – the information and sources on which an 
assessment is based.
• Analytical rigour – the analytical processes and tools/methods 
applied to the information.
• Complexity and volatility – the inherent properties of the 
environment being analysed (that may influence judgement stability).
The main purpose of evaluating analytical confidence is to enable articulation 
of the strengths and weaknesses of analytical judgements. In addition to 
communicating this to decision-makers, evaluations of analytical confidence 
can be used for quality assurance and preparing for follow-up work as it 
highlights aspects of analysis that could be improved.
Section 5 – Dissemination
3.49. Dissemination is defined as: the timely conveyance of intelligence, in 
appropriate forms and means, to those who need it.52 Getting intelligence 
to the user at the right time and in the appropriate format is essential for 
successful intelligence operations. 
3.50. Requirement management. Requirement management is as vital in 
the dissemination phase as it is in direction and collection. Wherever possible, 
initial tasking should include the requirement for direct dissemination and the 
means by which this should be achieved. The process must be able to track 
the status of each intelligence requirement to confirm whether it has been 
satisfied or if it requires further tasking. This mechanism will also ensure that 
the demander confirms receipt of the report. Intelligence dissemination should 
include provision for feedback and dialogue from the decision-maker and 
users, between peers and from analyst to collector.
52 NATOTerm.
Intelligence without communication is irrelevant.
 
General A M Grey, United States Marine Corps
“

67
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
3.51. Dissemination management. It is important for intelligence staff 
to manage the dissemination process continuously. Without effective 
management, communications paths can become saturated by information. 
For example, single-source reporting may be retransmitted by many 
intermediate collection agencies, resulting in circular reporting.53 Advances in 
technology are also transforming dissemination through enhancing the means 
available for storing and accessing information, whilst some collection systems 
can disseminate collected information to requesters on a real time or near-real 
time basis, vastly increasing their responsiveness.
Factors affecting dissemination
3.52. Push and pull principles. Dissemination has traditionally consisted of 
both push and pull control principles, but their application will continue to be 
modified by rapid advances in storing and accessing information and data, and 
the resulting intelligence assessments. Technological advances will continue to 
see a move away from reliance on end product reporting to a position where 
intelligence personnel will be able to search and discover all available data 
relevant to their requirements.
a. The push and pull concepts. The push concept allows for higher 
formations to push information down to lower levels of command to 
satisfy intelligence requirements and for lower levels of command 
to push intelligence upward. The pull concept involves using cloud 
storage, knowledge repositories, databases, intelligence files or other 
data and information repositories that are accessible to intelligence 
organisations at all levels of command. Intelligence products should 
be organised and presented using web-based technologies and 
universally recognised standards within Defence. 
b. Dynamic access. This is a data-centric methodology centred 
around subscription and alerting services. This requires neither the 
‘shotgun’ push of large volumes of data to any and all interested 
parties nor the requirement for analysts to actively hunt for relevant 
data, information and intelligence. Instead, it allows for a high level 
of situational awareness by alerting users to the availability of new 
information without the need to immediately disseminate it. As artificial 
53 Circular reporting occurs where material is conveyed and then repeated a number 
of times in separate assessments when in fact it has just come from one source. The 
repetition gives the appearance that the material may be new or additional corroboration 
when it had actually been reported previously.

68
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
intelligence and machine learning technologies mature, this will provide 
a learning system that is able to predict and signpost the most relevant, 
timely and important information to the right user at the right time. 
3.53. Dissemination methods. Intelligence is disseminated by three core 
methods: verbal briefing, printed material and electronically.54 Electronic means 
of storing and accessing information have and will continue to develop at 
pace, thereby enhancing the ability of intelligence users at all levels to access 
material directly rather than being reliant on receiving cascaded information, 
data or assessments. The Defence Digital Defence Information Environment 
will underpin future developments in storing, managing and accessing 
information, data and assessments.
3.54. Formatting. After determining who needs to receive each report, 
intelligence staff must determine how much of the report each user requires 
and in what format. Considerations include the decision-makers requirements 
or preferences, user requirement, speed of transmission, the available 
bandwidth, legal restrictions and security classification.
3.55. Principles of dissemination. Dissemination is governed by the 
principles of: latency, appropriateness, urgency, distribution and security. 
These are explained below.
a. Latency. There are two aspects to latency. The first is when 
dissemination is too late for an intended purpose and is thus 
redundant. The second refers to intelligence that is time sensitive, 
where accuracy decays or the information loses its value with the 
passage of time. Both aspects drive the requirement to deliver 
intelligence to its intended user as quickly as possible. Intelligence 
products must detail when any truncation of processing to meet 
deadlines was required so that the user may treat it with an  
appropriate level of discretion.
b. Appropriateness. Disseminated intelligence should enhance 
understanding and be in an accessible format. IRM staff will ensure the 
appropriateness of intelligence to meet the user’s needs, and make 
54 Printed material may include intelligence reports, intelligence summaries, maps and 
imagery intelligence reports. Cloud-based storage, knowledge repositories and websites 
can store multiple forms of information and may allow demanders to conduct their own 
IRM. The effectiveness of any form of electronic storage and retrieval is dependent on its 
management and the quality of the inputs, including any underlying coding.

69
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
sure that it is intelligible and disseminated across a suitable system. If it 
fails to do so, it will be worthless.
c. Urgency. Whenever possible, information obtained to meet an 
intelligence requirement should be converted into intelligence before 
dissemination. However, when time is at a premium, the full processing 
and analysis of information may not be possible and dissemination 
should be undertaken as quickly as possible, with the caveat that it is 
unprocessed and may not be reliable.55 Data-centric approaches now 
allow for the assessment of a wider range of information and data, 
without reliance on the judgement of the value of a single piece of 
information.
d. Distribution. Intelligence staff are responsible for ensuring that all 
intelligence is disseminated to those who need it. The commander and 
intelligence staff may require the distribution of additional summaries of 
intelligence to other agencies and formations outside the normal chain 
of command, such as partners across government. Commanders 
should ensure that suitable capabilities and processes are in place to 
enable effective distribution. Technological advances in information 
and data storage and accessibility also allow intelligence staff greater 
access to data and assessments relevant to their requirements. 
e. Security. Intelligence should be classified at the level required and 
not be over-classified. Over-classification causes delays in handling 
and transmission. The use of ‘tear-lines’ can balance the requirement 
to maintain security and protect the source whilst allowing for the 
greatest possible distribution. There may be occasions when the risk 
of compromising the source has to be weighed against the value of 
the information. On such occasions, the intelligence staff must make 
recommendations on the impact of possible compromise to assist 
the commander in making a decision; such decisions must not be 
taken without J2 advice, including consultation with the originator of 
the intelligence. Special arrangements are required to ensure effective 
intelligence exchange between allies and occasional partners. The 
classification of the product must reflect its content and the final arbiter 
of this is the agency supplying the information.
55 This applies particularly to urgent operational information and intelligence at the 
tactical level.

70
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Dissemination procedures
3.56. Knowledge repositories. Interconnected intelligence repositories 
are required to simplify access to intelligence in digital storage, from multiple 
databases, whilst guaranteeing data integrity and speed of dissemination. 
Increasing the connectivity between information and data repositories 
is essential to enable the integration, sharing and fusion of data across 
operational domains, disciplines and platforms. Ongoing Defence programmes 
will further enable analysts to access information, data and assessments from 
across the spectrum of single-Service information storage systems.
3.57. Dissemination issues. Dissemination is reliant on the availability of 
suitably accredited systems to process the information and the availability of 
sufficient bandwidth to enable the movement of data between locations. The 
IRM staff must consider the means of dissemination on receipt of the original 
intelligence requirement. They must also check with the demander the format 
in which they want to receive an answer, as well as checking they have the 
means to receive it.
3.58. Evaluating reports. Evaluating reports will determine how well the 
intelligence process is satisfying the commander’s and others’ intelligence 
requirements. IRM staff should review the relevance, completeness and 
timeliness of intelligence reporting.
3.59. Quality control. Intelligence must be in a form that the recipient 
readily understands and can directly use. Intelligence staff should consider 
the clarity, relevance, currency, brevity, ease of assimilation – ideally by using 
fused products assimilated from multiple sources – and adherence to security 
procedures before disseminating an assessment.
Reporting formats
3.60. NATO reporting formats. The UK uses NATO standards for report 
formats and message sets to guarantee multinational interoperability.56 
Wherever possible, written and web-based intelligence reports should be 
consistent with the NATO formats in Table 3.3.
56 AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence and Security , 
Chapter 4.

71
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Report Description
Intelligence report 
(INTREP)
Sent whenever information or intelligence is urgent 
and contains any deductions that can be made in the 
time available. INTREPs can comprise threat reporting 
containing unprocessed data and information.
Intelligence 
summary 
(INTSUM)
A concise, periodic summary of intelligence about the 
current situation within the joint operations area. It is 
designed to update the current intelligence picture 
and to highlight important developments during the 
reporting period and includes any information or 
intelligence relevant to extant intelligence requirements.
Supplementary 
intelligence report 
(SUPINTREP)
A stand-alone summary of intelligence for a given 
subject or situation. It updates the current intelligence 
picture, addressing a specific issue or highlighting 
important developments inside the normal reporting 
cycle.
Single-source 
reports
Other intelligence reports and summaries are 
periodically generated to address specific subjects, 
for example, interrogation reports and technical 
intelligence reports.
Counter-intelligence 
reports
Similar to INTREPs, counter-intelligence (CI) 
reports comprise CI-INTREPs, CI-INTSUMs and 
CI-SUPINTREPs. Counter-intelligence staff may also 
produce threat assessments and threat warnings to 
inform commanders of specific security threats.
Thematic reports
These address aspects of the operating environment, 
such as a geographic location, a political or religious 
movement or a particular adversary organisation.
Table 3.3 – NATO reporting formats 
3.61. Other intelligence reporting formats. In addition to the formal 
NATO Alliance, the UK is a party of a large number of political and military 
agreements on both a bilateral and multilateral basis. Comprehensive 
intelligence exchange arrangements already exist between most of our allies 
and partners. When conducting multinational operations, the basic principle is 
for each nation to deploy with its own intelligence infrastructure and then adapt 
to any coalition requirements. In respect of reporting formats, intelligence 
specialists must be aware of other reporting formats they may need to use. A 
standardised approach is much easier to achieve if these have been decided 
from the outset prior to deployment.

72
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Key points
• The four core functions in intelligence are: direction, collection, processing 
and dissemination. 
• Multiple-source intelligence comprises more than one line of reporting 
from one or more collection disciplines. One can have multiple sources 
within a single collection discipline. 
• Multidisciplinary intelligence fuses information drawn from more than one 
source from across two or more collection disciplines.
• Intelligence evaluation examines reliability of the source and credibility 
of the information. A widely used framework is the NATO Intelligence 
Grading System, which grades reliability and credibility in an 
alphanumeric digraph.
• The Defence Intelligence all-source analytic standards direct that analysis 
and assessment should be independent, clear, comprehensive, auditable, 
relevant, rigorous, objective and timely. 

73
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
3
The core functions and the intelligence cycle
Notes

[Page 84: No extractable text]

75
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 4
Chapter 4 explains the principal disciplines, specialisms 
and activities that generate information that is subsequently 
processed into intelligence. The chapter also includes legal 
considerations.
Section 1 – Collection disciplines  . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Section 2 – Analytical specialisms . . . . . . . . . . . 82
Section 3 – Materiel and personnel exploitation  . . . . 84
Section 4 – Intelligence, surveillance and  
                   reconnaissance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Section 5 – Counter-intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Section 6 – Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Section 7 – Legal considerations in the employment  
                   of intelligence disciplines  . . . . . . . . . 96
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104

76
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
... one should make a conscious 
decision as to the collection: there is 
an abundance of data surrounding 
us all now, most of it freely available, 
but there is only so much time and 
so many resources to handle it. Effort 
must therefore be focused on the 
specific items and issues necessary 
for you ...
 
 
General Sir Rupert Smith, The Utility of Force 
”
“

77
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
Chapter 4
Intelligence disciplines 
and activities
4.1. Intelligence production is organised into a range of specialised activities 
or disciplines. There are three main categories.
• Collection disciplines – specific groups of related methods of 
acquiring data and information from technical and human sources.
• Analytical specialisms – fields of subject matter expertise that draw 
on information acquired through the various collection disciplines to 
produce analysis and assessments to support understanding and 
decision-making.
• Multiple-intelligence activities – these draw on combinations of 
collection and analytic disciplines, typically directed towards specific 
operational effects.
Section 1 – Collection disciplines
4.2. Signals intelligence. Signals intelligence (SIGINT) is defined as: 
intelligence derived from electromagnetic signals or emissions. 57 It is the 
generic term used to describe communications intelligence (COMINT) 
and electromagnetic intelligence (ELINT) when there is no requirement to 
differentiate between these two types of intelligence, or to represent their 
fusion.58 COMINT and ELINT are respectively defined as follows.
a. Communications intelligence. COMINT is defined as: intelligence 
derived from electromagnetic communications and communication 
systems by other than intended recipients or users.59 COMINT is typically 
derived through the interception of communications and data links. 
Such information may be collected in verbal form by receiving broadcast 
57 NATOTerm.
58 This discipline is described further in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-2.4, Allied Joint 
Doctrine for Signals Intelligence .
59 NATOTerm.

78
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
radio messages, by intercepting point-to-point communications, such 
as telephones and radio relay links, or as data by intercepting either 
broadcast or point-to-point data downlinks.
b. Electromagnetic intelligence. ELINT is defined as: intelligence 
derived from electromagnetic non-communications transmissions 
by other than intended recipients or users.60 ELINT is derived from 
the technical assessment of electromagnetic non-communications 
emissions such as those produced by radars and by missile guidance 
systems. It also covers lasers and infrared devices when used for 
sensing and any other equipment that produces emissions in the 
electromagnetic spectrum. By comparing information about the 
parameters of the emission that has been intercepted with equipment 
signatures held in databases, valuable intelligence can be derived about 
the equipment and its operator.
4.3. Measurement and signature intelligence. Measurement and signature 
intelligence (MASINT) is defined as: intelligence derived from the scientific and 
technical analysis of data obtained from sensing instruments for the purpose of 
identifying any distinctive features associated with the source, emitter or sender, 
to facilitate the latter’s measurement and identification.61 MASINT capabilities 
use detailed measurements and signatures and a comparison of specific 
phenomena to detect, track, identify and/or otherwise characterise a sample, 
object or event. MASINT capabilities can exploit geophysical, electromagnetic 
or material properties. Examples of MASINT information include, but are not 
limited to, intelligence derived from advanced processing of radar emissions 
returns, nuclear air sampling and acoustic or seismic signatures.62
a. Acoustic intelligence. Acoustic intelligence (ACINT) is defined 
as: intelligence derived from acoustic signals or emissions.63 ACINT 
capabilities are primarily used to detect, classify and track the acoustic 
sources associated with maritime units and to enable strategic 
understanding through the exploitation of platform signatures. ACINT 
is predominately obtained in the underwater engagement space from 
the overt and/or covert collection by submarines, ships, aircraft and 
fixed systems. ACINT is a specific application of MASINT’s geophysical 
sub-discipline.
60 NATOTerm.
61 NATOTerm.
62 This discipline is described further in AJP-2.8, Allied Joint Doctrine for Measurement 
and Signature Intelligence .
63 NATOTerm.

79
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
b. Measurement and signature intelligence sub-disciplines. Allied 
Joint Publication (AJP)-2.8, Allied Joint Doctrine for Measurement and 
Signature Intelligence outlines eight MASINT sub-disciplines, as detailed 
in Table 4.1, acknowledging national variations in the categorisation of 
capabilities and sub-disciplines in this field.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization measurement and signature intelligence 
sub-disciplines
Biometrics Radio Geophysical Electro-
optical
Nuclear Materials Multi/
hyper-
spectral
Radar
Identification 
of facial 
features, 
scars, 
tattoos 
Voice 
Iris 
Fingerprint 
DNA 
Radio waves 
Electromagnetic 
pulse 
detection 
Unintentional 
radio 
frequency 
Seismic/ 
acoustic/ 
vibrometric 
sensing 
Very low 
frequency  
Extremely 
low 
frequency 
Non-imaging 
infrared  
Visible light 
Non-imaging 
ultraviolet  
LASER 
X-rays 
Gamma 
ray 
detection 
Neutron 
detection 
Cosmic 
ray 
detection 
Chemical/ 
biological 
sensing
- Liquid 
- Solid 
- Aerosol 
- Gas 
High 
spectral 
resolution 
across 
multiple 
narrow 
bands
- Infrared
- Visible 
- Ultraviolet 
Microwave 
Over-the-
horizon 
radar 
Synthetic 
aperture 
radar  
Polarimetric 
Table 4.1 – Examples of measurement and signature intelligence 
sub-disciplines64
4.4. Geospatial intelligence. Geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) is defined as: 
intelligence derived from the exploitation and analysis of geospatial information, 
imagery and other data to describe, assess or visually depict geographically 
referenced activities and features.65 GEOINT includes imagery intelligence 
(IMINT) and the production or analysis of geospatial information; it underpins 
understanding, planning, navigation and targeting. Geospatial information 
is defined as: facts about the earth referenced by geographic position and 
arranged in a coherent structure.66 Assured geospatial information, which has 
been subject to quality assurance checks by a specialist geospatial centre, 67 
is known as foundation GEOINT. It describes the physical environment and 
includes data from the aeronautical, geographic, hydrographic, oceanographic 
and meteorological disciplines. GEOINT includes IMINT reports, which may 
be provided as machine-readable data or in more traditional formats (paper 
or digital maps and charts) and digital geospatial information, which may be 
64 Table derived from AJP-2.8, Allied Joint Doctrine for Measurement and Signature 
Intelligence, page 2-2.
65 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
66 NATOTerm.
67 See Joint Service Publication (JSP) 465, Defence Geospatial Intelligence Policy , Part 1.

80
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
provided as web services. It also defines the geospatial reference framework, 
consisting of a common datum and coordinate system, which enables other 
data or information (including intelligence mission data) to be linked and 
visualised in space and time as interactive layers – this forms the foundation for 
a common operating picture. 
4.5. Imagery intelligence. IMINT is defined as: intelligence derived from 
imagery acquired from sensors that can be ground-based, seaborne or 
carried by air or space platforms.68 IMINT can be both still imagery or full 
motion video, across various electromagnetic bands, including visible light 
and infrared. IMINT can be supported by, as well as support, other intelligence 
collection disciplines, thereby increasing the level of confidence in the resulting 
product. IMINT products are the result of a deliberate effort to collect, process 
and exploit imagery to answer intelligence requirements.69 Technological 
developments in both the military and commercial world have further 
expanded the range of sources available. Advances in artificial intelligence 
and machine learning are becoming capable of supporting some aspects of 
imagery analysis. Imagery, in and of itself, is not intelligence; IMINT is produced 
by imagery analysts who have conducted appropriate analysis of individual 
image sequences using specific tools and techniques. Image sensors can 
also provide information directly that is operationally useful, for example, for 
overwatch or general situational awareness/ground orientation imagery that 
has not been formally analysed and is not categorised as IMINT.70 
4.6. Human intelligence. Human intelligence (HUMINT) is defined as: 
intelligence derived from information collected by human operators and 
primarily provided by human sources.71 It is achieved through observing 
or directly communicating with people. It encompasses debriefing, source 
handling, tactical questioning, interrogation, military intelligence liaison, 
and covert passive surveillance, which are all conducted by trained 
personnel.72 The direction, coordination and supervision of deployed military 
HUMINT elements are the responsibility of the J2X cell as part of collection 
management. J2X staff will maintain the register of sources and deconflict 
both HUMINT and counter-intelligence activity. In addition, they will provide 
68 AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence and Security .
69 AJP-2.6, Allied Joint Doctrine for Imagery Intelligence .
70 This discipline is described further in AJP-2.6, Allied Joint Doctrine for Imagery 
Intelligence.
71 NATOTerm.
72 Tactical questioning and interrogation of captured persons must comply with the 
applicable international and domestic law. See JDP 1-10, Captured Persons, and JSP 383, 
The Joint Service Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict .

81
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
advice to commanders on HUMINT and the Regulation of Investigatory Powers 
Act 2000 (RIPA). HUMINT activities often occur alongside those involving 
counter-intelligence and many of the skills and capabilities are common. 
HUMINT and counter-intelligence should be regarded as being complementary 
intelligence functions and must not become competitive.73 
4.7. Open-source intelligence. Open-source intelligence (OSINT) is defined 
as: intelligence derived from publicly available information, as well as other 
unclassified information that has limited public distribution or access.74 This 
encompasses the processes of collection and analysis of publicly available 
information (PAI) to support intelligence functions, as well as the production 
of dedicated OSINT products. As such, anyone conducting research using 
PAI specifically for intelligence purposes would be conducting OSINT. PAI is 
described as any information where there is a reasonable basis to believe that 
it is lawfully made available to the general public. This includes: 
• all information available online, including that often referred to as 
open-source information; 
• any material published or broadcast for general public consumption; 
• information available on and by request to a member of the general 
public; 
• information lawfully seen or heard by any casual observer or made 
available at a meeting open to the general public; and
• information that is access limited, as a result of being behind a 
paywall, members-only forums or deemed ‘proprietary information 
having been collected by a commercial company’.75 
73 HUMINT is explained in further detail in AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, 
Counter-Intelligence and Security  and AJP-2.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Human Intelligence .
74 NATOTerm.
75 MOD Policy for Open-source Intelligence , 17 June 2021.

82
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.8. Open-source intelligence and media. Media monitoring, academic 
communities and industry all potentially provide examples of valuable 
open-source resources, while the Internet may provide material and insight 
into small, emerging and evolving adversarial groups.76 OSINT and media 
monitoring can be vital sources to support influence activities and for 
assessment. In complex operations, such material has an important part 
to play in achieving societal, cultural and ideological understanding. This is 
especially true when exploited by trained analysts to ensure the intelligence 
produced is unbiased and free of prejudice; open-source material is no less 
important than protectively marked material.77 
Section 2 – Analytical specialisms
4.9. Analytical specialisms are approaches that exploit specialist knowledge 
or expertise, and often make use of highly developed analytical frameworks 
originating in the social, human and hard sciences, or other bodies of 
professional knowledge such as medicine or finance. Analytical specialisms 
are usually all-source, or not dependent on any single collection source. 
‘All-source’ simply means that the intelligence analysis and assessment uses 
all available information, classified and unclassified, and includes government 
information as well as academic journals and media reports.78 
4.10. Defence Intelligence all-source intelligence assessment. Within 
the UK intelligence community, we specifically identify high-level all-source 
intelligence assessment as a unique analytical discipline. Intelligence 
assessment adds an additional layer of judgement to existing analysis 
from across the single intelligence environment, aimed at supporting the 
decision-making of the highest-level customers in government.79 The 
standards for all-source intelligence assessment are set by the Joint 
Intelligence Organisation of the Cabinet Office.80
76 OSINT may also require authorisation under RIPA-compliant procedures.
77 This discipline is explained in further detail in AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence and Security  and AJP-2.9, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Open-source Intelligence.
78 Professional Head of Intelligence Assessment (PHIA), Professional Development 
Framework for all-source intelligence assessment , January 2019.
79 PHIA, Professional Development Framework for all-source intelligence assessment , 
January 2019.
80 All-source analysis is explained in greater detail in AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Intelligence Counter-Intelligence and Security  and Allied Intelligence Publication (AIntP)-18, 
Intelligence Processing .

83
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.11. Specialisms. The list of specialisms below is not exhaustive and 
further examples may be found in AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, 
Counter-Intelligence and Security. These specialisms can provide stand-alone 
assessments or be used by analysts conducting all-source intelligence 
analysis, allowing them access to information, data and specialist intelligence 
assessments from the widest range of available sources. The range of 
specialisms includes the following.
a. Human factors analysis. This fuses all-source intelligence analysis 
with a wide range of specialist behavioural and social science expertise. 
This includes areas such as psychology, anthropology, human 
geography, sociology and communication studies. Assessments are 
made from the perspective of that audience to understand the influence 
of psychological, social, cultural and environmental factors of attention, 
perception, sense-making, decision-making and world view. These 
assessments use a systems approach, focusing on both individuals and 
groups within organisations and states of interest.
b. Human network analysis. Human network analysis is an all-source 
intelligence analytic methodology that provides basic intelligence in the 
form of detailed information on networks, relationships and intentions. 
These networks can be complex, multi-tiered and transnational; they 
try to create physical and psychological effects by using both physical 
and cyber capabilities. They are not generally organised in a manner of 
conventional armed forces. The capability to understand these physical 
and virtual networks and to influence important individuals and groups, 
their network connections and specific roles is crucial to achieving 
objectives and to protect interests, forces and security. 
c. Financial intelligence. Financial intelligence focuses on defence 
economics and threat finance. Defence economics is the analysis of 
economies and economic trends that are of interest to the Ministry 
of Defence (MOD). Specifically for countries of interest, the analysis 
of defence spending, the domestic economy and the economic 
influence wielded over other nations. Threat finance is the analysis of 
threat entities’ financial activity to understand capabilities, intent and 
vulnerabilities.
d. Chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear-related 
intelligence. Chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) 
intelligence relates to all aspects of CBRN material. It includes, 

84
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
for example, capabilities, locations, movement, means of delivery, 
infrastructure, key persons, use of, proliferation and other types of 
weapons of mass effect.
e. Scientific and technical intelligence. Scientific and technical 
intelligence is defined as: intelligence derived from foreign developments 
in basic and applied scientific and technical research and development, 
including engineering and production techniques, new technology, 
weapons systems and their capabilities.81 Technical intelligence is 
defined as: intelligence concerning foreign technological developments, 
and the performance and operational capabilities of foreign materiel, 
which have or may eventually have a practical application for military 
purposes.82 There are intelligence products derived from the scientific 
examination and testing of materiel, including computer hardware and 
operating system software. 
f. Cultural heritage intelligence. Cultural heritage intelligence (CHINT) 
comprises awareness of both tangible remains, such as historic 
buildings and archaeological artefacts, and intangible heritage, such as 
rituals, customs and crafts, as it relates to human terrain analysis, human 
security and actions by state and non-state actors. CHINT permits 
understanding of how actors can exploit cultural heritage to achieve 
military, information, political, economic and diplomatic advantage.
Section 3 – Materiel and personnel 
exploitation
4.12. Materiel and personnel exploitation. Materiel and personnel exploitation 
(MPE) is a multi-intelligence fusion activity,83 and is defined as: exploiting materiel 
and personnel by scientific, technical and specialist intelligence activities.84 
By comprehensively exploiting materiel and personnel we can gain valuable 
information and intelligence, either as a specific operation or as supporting 
activity in routine intelligence production. It contributes to understanding target 
development, as well as tactics, techniques and procedures of the deployed 
force. It can also assist with legal prosecutions for UK Armed Forces, partners 
81 NATOTerm.
82 NATOTerm.
83 Multi-intelligence fusion can be multidisciplinary. Additionally, the term ‘multiple-source’ 
can represent the potential existence of multiple sources from within one discipline.
84 JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.

85
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
across government, as well as allies and host nations. MPE is critical in both 
force protection and in enabling freedom of manoeuvre.
4.13. Core components. There are a series of MPE activities regarded as 
core components, which together deliver the overall intelligence value. Joint 
Doctrine Note (JDN) 2/21, Materiel and Personnel Exploitation  is the definitive 
source of UK MPE doctrine and should be read in conjunction with any 
planning activity in which MPE is involved. The core components of MPE are 
shown in Figure 4.1 and further detailed in JDN 2/21. 
Figure 4.1 – Materiel and personnel exploitation components
4.14. Multi-intelligence fusion. Multi-intelligence fusion covers those military 
activities where multiple intelligence sources can be fused within a single 
organisation to create direct operational effect in support of the commander. 
Where intelligence is principally developed to support a commander’s 
decision-making process, and may secondarily be used directly for operational 
reasons, multi-intelligence fusion may change this priority: supporting 
decision-making may be secondary to supporting directed military activities. 
Forensic
and biometric 
exploitation
Site
exploitation
Technical 
exploitation
Materiel and 
personnel 
exploitation
Weapons
exploitation
Financial 
exploitation
Chemical
exploitation
Document 
and media 
exploitation
Captured 
persons 
exploitation

86
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
UK RC135 Rivet Joint – one of the Royal Air Force’s primary intelligence, surveillance  
and reconnaissance platforms
Section 4 – Intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance
4.15. Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) is an integrated 
activity and a process rather than an intelligence discipline. It receives 
operational tasking, provides direction to ISR capabilities, collects data 
and information, translates this into a useable format and sends it for use 
by decision-makers, effecters and intelligence analysts. ISR has three 
primary outputs: support to operations; support to targeting; and support to 
knowledge development.
4.16. Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance process. ISR draws 
primarily on technical collection capabilities, potentially fusing non-technical 
and technical collection data in real and near-real time. ISR employs a five-step 
process comprising task, collect, process, exploit and disseminate (TCPED). 
These processes are outlined below, with ISR further detailed in JDN 1/23, 
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance . In this publication, the 
relationship between the intelligence cycle and ISR is explained in Chapter 3, 
Section 3. The five-step ISR process comprises the following steps.
a. Task. Tasking comprises receiving external direction, internal 
planning, resourcing, management and allocation of ISR capabilities 

87
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
(including processing, exploitation and dissemination capabilities) 
against the outcomes required.
b. Collect. Collection is the gathering of information by ISR 
capabilities. These assets can include technical and human sources to 
provide raw data. 
c. Process. Processing is the conversion of collected raw data into 
a useable format for further exploitation, storage or dissemination. 
Depending on the data collected, processing may be undertaken by 
humans or machines.
d. Exploit. Processed data and information are exploited to derive 
value and attribute value to and from it. This process may also identify 
the requirement for additional data or information.
e. Disseminate. Dissemination is the process of providing access to 
data, information and intelligence resulting from the collect, process and 
exploit processes. Access may be enabled in near-real time or following 
more rigorous processing and exploitation activity.
4.17. Joint intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. Allied joint 
doctrine refers to joint intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (JISR). 
JISR is defined as: an integrated intelligence and operations set of capabilities, 
which synchronises and integrates the planning of operations of all collection 
capabilities with the processing, exploitation, and dissemination of the 
resulting information in direct support of the planning, preparation, and 
execution of operations.85 JISR is further detailed in the three levels of Allied 
joint doctrine: AJP-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, Counter-intelligence 
and Security; AJP-2.7 , Allied Joint Doctrine for Joint Intelligence, Surveillance 
and Reconnaissance; and Allied Intelligence Publication (AIntP)-14, Joint 
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Procedures in Support of NATO 
Operations.
Section 5 – Counter-intelligence
4.18. Counter-intelligence is an all-source intelligence function that provides 
commanders at all levels with a detailed understanding of threats and 
vulnerabilities to enable them to make well-informed decisions on security 
85 NATOTerm.

88
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
measures. Counter-intelligence is defined as: those activities concerned with 
identifying and counteracting the threat to security posed by hostile intelligence 
services or organizations or by individuals engaged in espionage, sabotage, 
subversion or terrorism.86
4.19. The main thrust of the counter-intelligence effort is to counter hostile 
intelligence threats to personnel, information, plans, activities, capabilities and 
resources, both in the UK and overseas. Counter-intelligence investigations will 
be conducted against persons or groups believed to be engaged in terrorism, 
espionage, subversion and sabotage activity. Counter-intelligence investigations 
provide commanders with the information required to address vulnerabilities, 
aiming to provide knowledge and understanding to keep privileged information 
secure, equipment secure and personnel safe. Counter-intelligence operations 
further enable a commander to contest and counter terrorism, espionage, 
subversion and sabotage threats. A core activity within counter-intelligence is 
counter-espionage – the investigation, understanding and mitigation of the risk 
posed by and to UK nationals from a hostile intelligence service, where the UK 
national has access to classified material or sensitive information that could be 
used by a hostile intelligence service.
4.20. Counter-intelligence – aims. The outcomes that counter-intelligence 
aims to achieve are outlined in Table 4.2. This list is not exhaustive but 
represents the main aims.
Aim Description
Understanding Understand the intelligence threat from our adversaries.
Detection Discover an intelligence threat in time to take the 
appropriate action.
Denial Deny an adversary the access or influence that they seek 
to successfully carry out their aim.
Mitigation Reduce the severity of the impact of an adversary’s 
actions.
Disruption Disrupt an adversary’s hostile intelligence service’s ability 
to threaten Defence capabilities and personnel.
Deterrence Activity that deters adversary hostile activity.
Exploitation
Identify an adversary’s intent and/or capabilities to 
provide opportunities for further exploitation and build our 
understanding of the intelligence threat posed.
Table 4.2 – Counter-intelligence – aims
86 NATOTerm.

89
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.21. Counter-intelligence principles. Underpinning all counter-intelligence 
aims and activities are several principles, which are central to the effectiveness 
and success of counter-intelligence activity. These principles are explored 
further below.
a. Proactiveness. The primary role of counter-intelligence staff is to 
proactively find, understand and contest intelligence threats to the force. 
They will then subsequently identify, in collaboration with risk owners, 
vulnerabilities to maintain operational resilience and freedom of action. 
b. Early engagement. The assistance of counter-intelligence staff 
at the outset of the initial planning phase of the operation is essential. 
During operational-level planning, counter-intelligence personnel should 
ensure commanders understand the intelligence threats and threats to 
security posed by hostile adversaries.
c. Continuity. The counter-intelligence process needs to be 
sustainable in nature. The process needs to ensure continuous 
monitoring, awareness and understanding, as well as maintaining the 
ability to contest threats to security.
d. Sensitivity. Counter-intelligence products and activities often do not 
merit the widest dissemination. This is especially important when they 
contain sensitive information that may detrimentally impact any current 
investigation or operation.
e. Interoperability. Common or interoperable processes, networks 
and systems are required to support counter-intelligence direction, 
collection, processing and dissemination, and to manage the 
counter-intelligence organisation. 
f. Exchange of information. During operations, the need to counter 
the existing and constantly changing threat will require the timely 
exchange of all available counter-intelligence information. 
g. Counter-intelligence partnerships. Liaison between national and 
allied counter-intelligence organisations at the various levels and the 
appropriate military commands will lead to greater awareness and 
understanding of the overall threats and related problems in peacetime. 

90
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.22. Counter-intelligence activities. Counter-intelligence is delivered 
through five basic counter-intelligence functions: foundational services; 
investigations; collection; analysis, assessment and dissemination; and 
operations. These are explained below.
a. Foundational services. The foundation of an effective 
counter-intelligence programme is a proactive counter-intelligence 
awareness programme that identifies threats and vulnerabilities against 
the supported unit. The programme should incorporate a broad range 
of counter-intelligence support functions, such as: threat education; 
threat briefings; counter-intelligence surveys; support to threat 
vulnerability assessments; and providing counter-intelligence advice 
or assistance to commanders and unit security officers to ensure 
counter-intelligence indicators are reported and investigated.
b. Counter-intelligence investigations. Counter-intelligence 
investigations provide commanders and policymakers with the 
information required to address vulnerabilities. Counter-intelligence 
investigations can provide a basis for counter-intelligence operations 
and collection; counter-intelligence investigations can also be 
developed from counter-intelligence operations, collection or 
analysis but must be conducted in strict accordance with applicable 
national laws of the respective nations involved. Counter-intelligence 
investigations are only to be conducted by suitably qualified and 
experienced personnel in accordance with Joint Service Publication 
(JSP) 440, The Defence Manual of Security. 
c. Counter-intelligence collection. Counter-intelligence 
collection is the systematic gathering of information concerning 
threats to commands, personnel, activities, forces, installations, 
facilities, systems, information and capabilities from terrorism, 
espionage, subversion and sabotage or other intelligence activities. 
Counter-intelligence collection assets have the responsibility to collect 
and provide threat information to the commander in a timely and 
appropriate manner. Collection reporting can often be event-driven and 
thus should be transmitted without regard to a specific time schedule. 
d. Counter-intelligence analysis, assessment and dissemination.  
Counter-intelligence analysis equates to the processing stage of 
the intelligence cycle. Counter-intelligence entities may employ an 
embedded analytic support element to provide readily available subject 

91
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
matter expertise to entities performing the other counter-intelligence 
functions. The analysis process and counter-intelligence reports 
produced from it are disseminated as an intelligence product. 
Dissemination is the critical function of providing counter-intelligence 
assessments to the appropriate recipients in a secure and timely 
fashion.
e. Counter-intelligence operations. Counter-intelligence operations 
are a means of countering terrorism, espionage, subversion and 
sabotage threats. Counter-intelligence operations are handled on 
a need-to-know basis and cover a spectrum of activities during 
peacetime, including activity below the threshold of armed conflict, and 
international and non-international armed conflicts. They can make a 
significant input to force protection and operations security, or they can 
deliver operational outcomes in their own right. 
4.23. Routine and non-routine functions. Counter-intelligence operations 
are categorised between routine and non-routine functions. These functions 
include the following activities. 
a. Routine functions. Routine functions include counter-intelligence 
awareness and outreach, and establishing and maintaining liaison with 
appropriate entities. They also include restricted countries list travel 
briefings and debriefings,87 as well as counter-intelligence debriefings. 
Counter-intelligence staff will also conduct counter-intelligence 
investigations and insider threat detection.
b. Non-routine functions. Non-routine functions include: offensive and 
defensive counter-intelligence operations; recruiting sources in support 
of investigations and operations;88 using special investigative techniques 
as part of either counter-intelligence investigations or operations; and 
conducting compromise assessments. Counter-intelligence personnel 
may also support national security interventions.
87 Travel briefings and debriefings are routine activities for a security practitioner, 
however, counter-intelligence may also contribute through providing the threat 
understanding. Similarly, the outcomes of travel briefings and debriefings may initiate 
counter-intelligence work.
88 This activity operates under specific authority, requires explicit permissions and may 
only be undertaken by specially trained personnel.

92
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.24. Counter-intelligence personnel. Counter-intelligence personnel are 
responsible for countering the threat posed by hostile intelligence services and 
subversive, criminal or terrorist groups or individuals. This requires identifying 
the potential targets of, and any vulnerabilities to, an adversary’s intelligence 
gathering operations. This information is used to inform operations security, 
counter-surveillance and deception planning, including protective security 
policy. It also supports force protection efforts, cyberspace operations, 
information operations, security, psychological operations, targeting and 
biometric exploitation.
4.25. Counter-intelligence across multiple operational domains.  
Counter-intelligence operates in all operational domains, but significantly within 
the cyber and electromagnetic domain. Counter-intelligence is responsible for 
those activities that are concerned with identifying and countering threats to 
Defence operations, activity and personnel from hostile intelligence services, 
or other hostile actors or organisations engaged in terrorism, espionage, 
subversion or sabotage in both the real and virtual worlds. Counter-intelligence 
will inform cybersecurity as an aspect of protective security and will contribute 
to cyber threat assessments. Cybersecurity can also identify threats and 
vulnerabilities leading to proactive counter-intelligence operations and 
investigations. 
4.26. Counter-intelligence coordination. The Defence Counter-Intelligence 
Coordinating Authority (CICA) is responsible for the overall coherence and 
deconfliction of counter-intelligence activity across Defence. This role is 
performed by Defence Intelligence, Counter-Intelligence. The Defence CICA 
will work closely with internal and external counter-intelligence leads to deliver 
strategic direction and guidance, provide operational counter-intelligence 
updates, and track and align counter-intelligence activities and priorities 
between force elements. The nature of coalition operations will determine the 
authorities in place for deployed counter-intelligence activity and operations.
Section 6 – Security
4.27 . Security is not itself an intelligence discipline or function but is an 
activity which seeks to protect the confidentiality, integrity and availability of 
people, information and assets. Security is defined as: the condition achieved 
when designated information, materiel, personnel, activities and installations 
are protected against espionage, sabotage, subversion, terrorism and damage, 

93
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
terrorism 
The unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence, instilling fear 
and terror, against individuals or property in an attempt to coerce or 
intimidate governments or societies, or to gain control over a population, to 
achieve political, religious or ideological objectives. (NATOTerm)
espionage 
In intelligence usage, an activity directed towards the acquisition of 
information through clandestine means and forbidden by the law of the 
country against which it is committed. (NATOTerm)
sabotage 
In intelligence usage, acts intended to injure, interfere with, or cause physical 
damage in order to assist an adversary or to further a subversive political 
objective. (NATOTerm)
subversion 
Action or a coordinated set of actions of any nature intended to weaken 
the military, economic or political strength of an established authority by 
undermining the morale, loyalty or reliability of its members. (NATOTerm)
organized crime  
Sustained illegal activities by an enterprise or group of persons, irrespective 
of national borders, and that have as their primary purpose the generation of 
profits. (NATOTerm)
A –Z
as well as against loss or unauthorized disclosure.89 Security is not the same 
as counter-intelligence, but security functions underpin counter-intelligence 
efforts and support counter-intelligence outcomes.
4.28. The threat to security. Threats to security can originate from both 
external and internal sources, with or without outside influence in any 
operational domain. Threats to security include the following.90
89 N ATOTerm. Further detail on security is available in AJP-2.2, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Counter-intelligence and Security Procedures .
90 J SP 440, The Defence Manual of Security  abbreviates terrorism, espionage, 
sabotage, subversion and organised crime to TESSOC.

94
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.29. Security intelligence. Security intelligence is defined as: intelligence on 
the identity, capabilities and intentions of hostile organizations or individuals 
who are or may be engaged in espionage, sabotage, subversion, terrorism and 
organized crime.91 Security intelligence covers intelligence support across the 
full range of terrorism, espionage, subversion, sabotage, organised crime and 
other security threats.
4.30. Insider threat. Defence personnel should pay particular attention to 
insider threats. The ‘insider threat’ comes from personnel who have privileged 
access to classified or official data and subsequently abuse this access to 
destroy, damage, remove or disclose the data. It also includes those personnel 
who have legitimate access to Defence facilities and use this access to 
conduct acts of terrorism or sabotage. Insider threats can potentially cause 
grave damage to information, resources and personnel and have a critical 
impact on operations.
4.31. Threat assessment. A threat assessment evaluates the range of 
identified threats and provides a basis to determine physical and operational 
mitigation measures for protection against those threats. Threat assessments 
should contain the following as a minimum: identification of the threat; the main 
intelligence judgements concerning the threat; and the degree of confidence in 
the assessment of the specific threat. 
4.32. Countering the threat to security. All personnel involved in Defence 
business, including military, civilians and contractors, have a personal 
responsibility to counter the threat to security by applying good security 
behaviours.92 At a higher-level, commanders and security staff have specific 
responsibilities and outputs.
a. Commanders. The ultimate responsibility for intelligence and
security rests with the commander, who should be familiar with the
intelligence and security processes and have sufficient situational
awareness to articulate their critical information requirements.
Commanders set the command climate regarding security and the
security posture to be adopted in accordance with threat advice from
security staff.
b. Security staff. The principal responsibility of security personnel is
to advise commanders on security threats, including those assessed
91 NATOTerm.
92 S ee the Defence Personnel Security Strategy  for further detail.

95
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
by counter-intelligence. Security staff manage and support operations 
to counter the security threats. Specifically they: collect, process, 
analyse and disseminate information related to counter-intelligence 
requirements; produce and disseminate current threat assessments; 
contribute to the operations security process, including the planning, 
coordination and application of protective security measures throughout 
the formation; establish and maintain liaison with civil law enforcement 
and counter-intelligence authorities; and ensure there is a clear 
classification guide and disclosure procedure that complies with the 
Defence security policy.
4.33. Security – core principles. Commanders are ultimately responsible 
for security. Additionally, security operations are conducted according to the 
following principles.
• There should be a single focus at each command level for security
policy and incident reporting.
• Security teams must be established to engage threats and to give
security advice to commanders at each level of command.
• Security operations must be coordinated and integrated with the
intelligence effort, in consultation with the operations and other staff.
• The collection of security-related information should be coordinated
at each level of command and integrated with the overall intelligence
collection effort.
• Counter-intelligence and security threat warnings and assessments
should be produced at the lowest possible security classification,
and disseminated as widely as possible.
4.34. Security awareness and education. All individuals who have 
authorised access to classified material must be trained in the dangers to 
security arising from indiscreet conversations, relationships with the media, 
and the threat presented by hostile intelligence service activity. Individuals 
must be aware of the requirement to report any approach or manoeuvre that 
they consider suspicious or unusual.
4.35. ‘Need-to-know’. This describes the legitimate requirement of a 
prospective recipient of data to know, access or possess any sensitive 

96
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
information represented by this data. The principle is that knowledge or 
possession of classified information should be strictly limited to those who are 
cleared to the appropriate security level and who clearly have a need -t o-k now 
to carry out their duties, regardless of rank or position. However, the 
responsibility to share information with coalition partners requires products 
to be written for release, balancing the need-to-know principle with the 
requirement to share. 
Section 7 – Legal considerations in the 
employment of intelligence disciplines
4.36. The activities of the UK Armed Forces are subject to national and 
international law.93 Intelligence activity conducted within the context of a 
military operation will have a legal dimension; there must be a legal basis for 
the activity and it must be conducted in a lawful manner. The applicable law 
will depend upon the overarching legal framework for a particular operation as 
well as the particular function conducted within each stage of the intelligence 
cycle. The legal annex of any Chief of Joint Operation’s Operational Directive 
provides further guidance for specific operations. Intelligence activity must be 
consistent with the UK’s obligations in international law, issued rules of  
engagement (ROE) and applicable domestic law, as well as relevant aspects 
of host-nation law and international human rights law (IHRL). To these may 
be added rights and obligations under United Nations (UN) Security Council 
resolutions or bilateral and multilateral agreements. 
4.37. Rules of engagement. ROE, provided as part of a Chief of the Defence 
Staff’s Directive, will specify the permissions and limitations under which forces 
undertaking any military operation will operate. They serve as a policy and 
operational guidance tool and must reflect and be consistent with the legal 
93 J DP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, paragraph 2.49.
The threats to our security are complex and rapidly evolving as 
criminals, hackers, malicious insiders and hostile foreign states 
continually find new ways of staying one step ahead of us. … At 
the same time, we are continually creating new vulnerabilities as we 
adopt new technologies and new ways of working. 
Paul Martin, The Rules of Security, Staying Safe in a Risky World“

97
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
framework of the operation. The creation of enabling ROE is a vital part of the 
direction function of the intelligence process. The responsibility for compliance 
with ROE is a command function. Use of covert actions and collection of 
biometric data must be authorised within an ROE profile for them to be 
undertaken on an operation. ROE may also restrict the use of some collection 
capabilities.94 The formulation of ROE is a particular challenge for multinational 
missions, where the interpretation of international law obligations, domestic laws 
and policies of the contributing nations adds complexity. It is the responsibility 
of the operational commander to ensure, through consultation with the relevant 
operational higher authority (for example, the Permanent Joint Headquarters), 
that the ROE profile enables the desired intelligence activity. 
4.38. Legal framework. All intelligence activity must be conducted within the 
correct overarching legal framework. Domestic law, international law (for example, 
the law of armed conflict (LOAC) or IHRL, such as the European Convention on 
Human Rights (ECHR)) may be applicable, as illustrated in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2 – Applicable law95
94 For example, an active collection radar system may be prohibited from use over a border.
95 See JDP 3-46, Legal Support to the Joint Operations , Chapter 2.
IHL international humanitarian law
LOAC law of armed conﬂict
AP    Additional Protocol
CA    Common Article
GC Geneva Convention
Domestic law
International human rights law
Emergency legislation
Host-nation law
State responsibility
International criminal law
Applicable lawExamples
Operation Layland: 
Nepal earthquake,
2015
Operation Gritrock: 
Sierra Leone Ebola 
outbreak, 2014
Operation Herrick: 
Afghanistan, 
2002–14
Operation Shader: 
Iraq, 2014 – present
Syria, 2015 – present
Operation Corporate: 
Falklands, 1982
Operation Granby: 
Gulf War 1, 1990–91
Operation Telic: 
Iraq, 2003–04
Operation Banner: 
Northern Ireland, 
1969 – 2007
Peacetime Non-international 
armed conﬂict
International 
armed conﬂict
Internal disturbances 
and tensions
Customary IHL (LOAC)
IHL (AP II + GC CA3) IHL (AP I + GCs)

98
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.39. International law. In most operations of an international nature, the 
legal mandate will be founded in international law and if there is an armed 
conflict, it will involve the application of LOAC.96 A conflict between states is 
an international armed conflict (IAC), whereas an armed conflict not between 
states (typically between governmental forces and non-governmental 
armed groups or between multiple non-governmental armed groups) is a 
non-international armed conflict (NIAC). The law relating to IACs is far more 
developed than NIACs, as set out in Figure 4.2. UK Armed Forces are directed, 
as a matter of policy, to apply broadly the same rules to a NIAC that they are 
legally bound to apply during an IAC.97
4.40. International human rights law. IHRL governs the obligations of states 
towards citizens and other individuals within their jurisdiction. The UK is bound 
by UN human rights treaties and the ECHR. The Human Rights Act gives effect 
to ECHR rights within UK law. The extraterritorial application of the ECHR 
and Human Rights Act has been the subject of extensive litigation in the UK 
domestic courts. ECHR jurisdiction is extended extraterritorially where: there 
is state agent authority and control (for example, in UK run detention facilities); 
or there is effective control over an area (for example, the UK is in occupation 
of an area or by exercising control in a specific area such as a checkpoint); 
or through ‘espace juridique’ (i.e. where the territory of one convention state 
is occupied by the armed forces of another convention state).98 With regards 
to state agent authority and control, this can arise as a result of: the acts 
of diplomatic and consular agents, through the exercise of public powers; 
or through the exercise of physical power and control over individuals (for 
example, custody).99 However, its application on operations elsewhere and at 
other times remains subject to legal and judicial scrutiny. Other IHRL provisions 
may also be applicable to operations. 
4.41. Host-nation law. Host-nation law may be a factor in identifying 
freedoms and constraints for intelligence activities. A status of forces 
agreement or other agreement may be in place between the UK and the host 
nation that will highlight freedoms and constraints and define the extent of 
the applicability of host nation law to UK Armed Forces. Commanders and 
intelligence staff must be familiar with the applicable host-nation law. 
96 JSP 383, The Joint Service Manual of Law of Armed Conflict .
97 JDP 3-46, Legal Support to Joint Operations , paragraph 2.4.
98 See House of Lords, Al Skeini (2007) UKHL 26, 13 June 2007 and Jaloud v The 
Netherlands [2014] App. No. 47708/08.
99 See Al-Saadoon & Others v Secretary of State for Defence [2016] EWCA Civ 811.

99
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
4.42. Domestic law. When planning and conducting intelligence collection 
activity, adherence with relevant UK domestic law is essential to ensure both 
that criminal liability100 does not arise and that activity is compatible with the UK 
human rights obligations. The following UK domestic law may be relevant to 
intelligence activity, but depending on the circumstances other laws may  
also apply. 
a. Bribery Act 2010. In accordance with Section 1 of the Bribery 
Act 2010, a person (including a member of the UK Armed Forces) is 
guilty of an offence where they offer, promise or give financial or other 
advantage to another person intending to induce that person to perform 
a function improperly or to reward them for improper performance. It is 
a defence for a person charged with a relevant bribery offence to prove 
that the person’s conduct was necessary for the proper exercise of any 
function of the armed forces when engaged on active service (i.e. an 
action or operation against an enemy, an operation outside the British 
Islands for the protection of life or property, or the military occupation of 
a foreign country or territory). Accordingly, where activity could amount 
to an offence under the Bribery Act the circumstances and necessity 
for that action must be effectively recorded. 
b. Computer Misuse Act 2010. The Computer Misuse Act 2010 
creates offences of unauthorised access to computer material and 
unauthorised modification of computer material. The offence of 
unauthorised access (hacking) is committed by a person who causes a 
computer to perform a function intending to secure unauthorised access 
to any program or data held in any computer. Unauthorised modification 
of computer material is committed when a person carries out an action 
which causes unauthorised modification of the contents of a computer 
intending to impair operation of a computer or program (denial of service 
attacks). Obtaining lawful authority for the activity in accordance with 
the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (IPA) will ensure that it is lawful for all 
purposes, provided it is within the scope of the authorisation. 
c. Human Rights Act 1998. UK intelligence activities must be 
compliant with UK obligations under the ECHR, which are enshrined 
within domestic law through the Human Rights Act 1998. These 
include, for example, the absolute right under Article 3, the prohibition 
100 Through Section 42 of the Armed Forces Act, a person subject to Service law or 
civilian subject to Service discipline remains subject to the criminal jurisdiction of the law of 
England and Wales when operating in the UK or elsewhere.

100
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment, which underpins 
captured persons (CPERS) activity and intelligence sharing. Of 
particular relevance to investigative intelligence activity is ECHR 
Article 8, which concerns the (qualified) right to private and family life 
and provides that there can be no interference by a public authority 
except as is necessary on one of the specified grounds. For the 
purposes of Defence, interference with the right to privacy needs to be 
in accordance with one or more of the legitimate aims prescribed in 
Article 8.101 Compliance with relevant statutory provisions (see below) 
may, in the circumstances, demonstrate that the interference is in 
pursuit of a legitimate aim, is in accordance with the law and the activity 
is proportionate to the interference. The territorial extent of the Human 
Rights Act is in line with that of ECHR.
d. Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000. The RIPA enables 
lawful use, by specified public authorities (including the UK Armed 
Forces), of covert investigative techniques, namely covert surveillance 
(intrusive and directed) and use of covert HUMINT sources. Under 
the 2021 Covert Human Intelligence Source Criminality Act, this may 
even include source activities that would be illegal unless authorised 
under RIPA. The RIPA authorisation process ensures that all-source 
activity satisfies the requirements of necessity (for example, on the 
grounds of national security) and proportionality, and is compatible with 
ECHR Article 8 (right to privacy). All Defence conduct amounting to 
covert surveillance or use of covert human intelligence source activity 
(including activity outside of the UK) must be appropriately authorised in 
accordance with MOD policy. 
e. Investigatory Powers Act 2016. The IPA governs investigative 
activity relating to communications and communications data. It 
enables lawful interception of communications, equipment interference 
and other acquisition of communications data subject to a rigorous 
statutory regime for authorisation, oversight and accountability of such 
activities. Failure to comply with the IPA may incur criminal liability  
and/or amount to a breach of the UK’s responsibilities under ECHR 
Article 8 and Human Rights Act (the right to privacy). 
101 Defence could also rely on other grounds such as that the activity is necessary for 
the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime.

101
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
f. UK data protection legislation. In the UK, data protection is
governed by the Data Protection Act 2018 and UK General Data
Protection Regulation. All collection, exploitation and sharing of
intelligence must comply with UK data protection legislation, which
includes provision for limited exemption only when required for
national security or defence purposes. Commanders must ensure the
legal framework for exploitation activities and information sharing is
established before starting an operation or as soon as feasible thereafter.
g. National Security Investment Act 2021. This legislation enables
the UK government to review transactions and investments on
national security grounds. It applies to any acquisition of a ‘material
influence’ in a company. It imposes a mandatory notification
obligation where transactions involve specified activities in the energy,
transport, communications, defence, artificial intelligence and other
technology-r elated sectors. Defence will likely support the process by
providing assessments. In addition to a risk over general information
security, there is likely to be a significant risk of litigation as claimants
seek to challenge any decisions.
h. Copyright. The Copyright, Designs and Patents Act (CDPA) 1988
gives creators of original work the right to control the ways in which
their material can be used. The protection is automatic. While the CDPA
1988 does allow for limited use of copyright material for non-business
purposes or private study, this exception does not apply when the
purpose is to disseminate to more than one person at substantially the
same time and for the same purpose. Consideration should be given
as to whether material can be obtained from a Crown copyright source,
under a MOD licence agreement or in accordance with a Public Domain
Creative Commons License.
i. Public records. The Public Records Act 1958, as amended by the
Public Records Act 1967 , dealt with the release of government papers.
The Acts provided that material would be released to the National
Archives, initially after 50 years, before this was reduced to 30 years.
The Freedom of Information Act 2000 substantially changed how
government records are accessed. The position now is that records
can be accessed from their creation unless they are subject to an
exemption, which may be relied upon to prevent release.

102
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
Specific considerations
4.43. Rules of evidence. All intelligence collection is intended to satisfy 
intelligence requirements and no specific provision is made about the manner 
or method of collection to meet the requirements of the rules of evidence. 
Where it is envisaged that a line of information gathering may be intended 
for, or result in, criminal proceedings, intelligence staff should advise the 
commander to seek early legal advice.
4.44. Captured persons. One of the purposes of CPERS is to obtain 
intelligence on an adversary’s structures, capabilities and intentions. The 
intelligence exploitation of CPERS by tactical questioning and interrogation is a 
specialist skill that is only to be exercised by trained and competent staff.102 In 
particular, humanitarian obligations relating to detention and the treatment of 
CPERS are paramount. Basic principles of humane treatment must be applied 
when dealing with all CPERS.103 CPERS must be treated humanely at all times 
and provided with respect for their person, honour and religion. To the extent 
permitted by the military operation, they must be afforded protection from 
the conflict and treated consistently in accordance with the UK’s obligations 
under customary international law, other applicable international law and 
treaty obligations. These basic principles are to be applied at all stages of the 
CPERS process from point of capture to release or transfer. In an IAC, Geneva 
Conventions III (regarding prisoners of war) and IV (regarding the protection of 
civilians who are detained or interned) are of particular relevance. In a NIAC, 
Common Article 3 to the Conventions and Additional Protocol II apply. During 
deployed operations, all personnel must be familiar with the processes for 
the handover of CPERS to the host nation and for criminal prosecution under 
host-nation law. UK personnel must treat CPERS humanely and conduct their 
detention and exploitation with all the protections provided by international 
and domestic human rights law. For more information see JDP 1-10, Captured 
Persons.
4.45. Intelligence sharing. In tandem with data protection law and policy are 
other MOD policies concerning the sharing of intelligence. Personnel should be 
aware of and apply the following.
a. The Fulford Principles. This policy relates to the detention and
interviewing of detainees overseas and the passing and receipt
of intelligence relating to detainees and is designed to ensure the
102 J DP 1-10, Captured Persons, 4th Edition, paragraphs 11.10 and 11.13.
103 S ee JDP 1-10, Captured Persons, 4th Edition, Chapter 2.

103
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
UK remains compliant with its human rights obligations. The policy 
enables UK Armed Forces to manage legal risk in respect of the 
International Law Commission’s draft articles on state responsibility 
for internationally wrongful acts. Where a state aids or facilitates 
an internationally wrongful act (examples include murder, torture, 
extraordinary rendition or any treatment that is cruel, inhuman or 
degrading) through the sharing of intelligence, the aiding state can 
be held equally liable with the state that carries out the internationally 
wrongful act. In this context, the risk will most likely arise where 
actionable intelligence is shared (name, location, etc.). Any proposed 
sharing of intelligence must take into account the Fulford Principles. 
b. Overseas Security and Justice Assistance Guidance. Similar to
the Fulford Principles and linked to the International Law Commission’s
draft articles on state responsibility for internationally wrongful acts,
this policy assists in ensuring that UK overseas security and justice
assistance work meets the UK’s human rights obligations and
values. Where UK Armed Forces are engaged in capacity building,
or case-s pecific activity (i.e. assistance may lead to individuals
being identified, interviewed, investigated, apprehended, detained,
prosecuted, ill-treated and/or punished by foreign authorities), this
policy is likely to be engaged and needs to be adhered to.

104
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
Key points
• The main collection disciplines are: signals intelligence – principally, 
communications intelligence and electromagnetic intelligence; geospatial 
intelligence, including imagery intelligence; measurement and signature 
intelligence; human intelligence; and open-source intelligence.
• Analytical specialisms draw on specialist knowledge or expertise, for 
example: human factors analysis; human network analysis; and scientific 
and technical intelligence. 
• All-source intelligence assessment is identified within Defence Intelligence 
as a unique analytical discipline, adding an additional layer of judgement 
to existing analysis to support the decision-making of the highest level 
customers in government. 
• Multi-intelligence activities cover those military activities where multiple 
intelligence sources can be fused within a single organisation to create 
direct operational effects. 
• Counter-intelligence assessments and investigations provide the 
commander with an understanding of the hostile intelligence service 
threat. In conjunction with security measures, this allows the commander 
to counter the threat with offensive and defensive measures.
• Intelligence activity conducted within the context of a military operation 
will have a legal dimension; there must be a legal basis for the activity and 
it must be conducted in a lawful manner.

105
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
4
Intelligence disciplines and activities
Notes

[Page 116: No extractable text]

107
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 5
Chapter 5 explains intelligence support to joint operations, 
specifically describing the use of intelligence support to 
gain an understanding of the human and information 
environments, and support to targeting and to operations 
evaluation. Chapter 5 concludes with a review of different 
approaches to intelligence development and an introduction 
to problem-centric approaches. 
Section 1 – Intelligence and operations across  
                   multiple operational domains  . . . . . . . 109
Section 2 – Analysis of the human and information  
                   environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
Section 3 – Intelligence support to targeting . . . . . . 120
Section 4 – Intelligence support to operations  
                   evaluation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Section 5 – Approaches to intelligence development  . 123
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127

108
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
When information was a scarce commodity, 
it could be considered in similar ways as 
other vital commodities ... Acquiring and 
protecting high-quality information made it 
possible to stay ahead of opponents and 
competitors ... As more information began 
to be digitised ... and communications 
became instantaneous, the challenges 
became those of plenty rather than scarcity 
... If they had bought into the idea that 
fast-flowing data streams could eliminate 
the fog of war, they could be in for a rude 
shock. Even without enemy interference, 
a fog could be caused by a superfluity of 
information – too much to filter, evaluate, 
digest – rather than the paucity of the past. 
 
 
Lawrence Freedman, Strategy  
”
“

109
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
Chapter  5
Intelligence and 
counter-intelligence 
support to joint operations
Section 1 – Intelligence and operations 
across multiple operational domains
5.1. Multi-domain integration.  Multi-domain integration (MDI) is a conceptual 
approach that seeks to better compete with our adversaries in an era of 
persistent competition. It seeks to generate advantage through integration 
across the three levels of operations (tactical, operational and strategic) and 
the five operational domains to create multi-domain effect that adds up to far 
more than simply the sum of the parts. MDI will highly likely include elements of 
more than one Service and may involve maritime (including amphibious), land, 
air, space, cyber and electromagnetic, and special forces. UK joint operations 
are commanded by the Joint Commander, Chief of Joint Operations (CJO), 
supported by the staff within the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ). 
PJHQ issues CJO’s orders and direction through operational orders and 
fragmentation orders which synchronise and coordinate forces in the 
operational theatre or for a specific operation.104 Operations spanning multiple 
operational domains are an evolution of joint operations, reflecting the 
introduction of the space, and cyber and electromagnetic domains. 
5.2. Joint operations area. Operations may be conducted in a designated 
joint operations area (JOA).105 The term JOA represents the area of land, 
sea and airspace defined by a higher authority in which a joint task force 
commander plans and conducts military operations to accomplish a specific 
mission.
104 See also Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, 6th Edition, 
paragraph 3.9 for detail on component commanders.
105 The term joint operations area is defined in Allied joint doctrine as: a temporary area 
within a theatre of operations defined by the Supreme Allied Commander Europe, in which 
a designated joint task force commander plans and executes a specific mission at the 
operational level. NATOTerm.

110
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
5.3. Focus of operational intelligence and operational intelligence 
planning. Operational intelligence provides commanders with the information 
and analysis to make decisions and contributes to the planning and execution 
of operations within the JOA. Additionally, operational intelligence staff are 
responsible for: joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment 
(JIPOE) and other associated inputs to the operational estimate process; 
planning and refining intelligence personnel structures; designing intelligence 
architectures and flows; and integration with the Defence single intelligence 
environment, partners across government, Five Eyes partners and allies.
5.4. Joint intelligence areas. To enable the focusing of the intelligence effort, 
the JOA is divided into two areas – the area of intelligence responsibility and 
the area of intelligence interest. These are explained below.
a. Area of intelligence responsibility.  The area of intelligence 
responsibility is defined as: a geographical area allocated to a 
commander, in which the commander is responsible for the provision of 
intelligence.106 It encompasses the area in which adversary actions can 
directly affect the commander’s forces and to which the commander 
can respond using available assets. In practice, the nature of the 
commander’s assigned collection capabilities will determine the 
allocation of the area.
b. Area of intelligence interest. The area of intelligence interest 
is defined as: a geographical area for which commanders require 
intelligence on the factors and developments that may affect the 
outcome of operations.107 The commander is not responsible for 
intelligence capability in the area; however, higher or neighbouring 
formations should provide answers to the intelligence staff’s questions 
pertaining to the area. The area of intelligence interest is likely to include 
locations where an adversary’s actions will influence the commander’s 
decisions, but the commander is not required to respond with their 
assets. The area need not be geographically next to each other and 
there may be areas outside the main area of intelligence interest that 
could exert influence on the JOA.
106 NATOTerm.
107 NATOTerm.

111
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
Section 2 – Analysis of the human and 
information environments
5.5. Analysis of the human environment has traditionally focused on 
understanding areas such as cultural practices, societal norms, beliefs and 
values, and social, political and economic organisation. At the operational level, 
human terrain analysis focused on conflict drivers across the three levels of 
operations, likely adversary actions (and how these could be targeted) and how 
our own actions would have impact (and how this may be mitigated if required). 
5.6. Integrated action now requires a much greater understanding of audiences 
to inform all aspects of planning. An audience is defined as: an individual, group 
or entity whose interpretation of events and subsequent behaviour may affect 
the attainment of the end state.108  To gain an understanding of the drivers of 
instability and audience behaviours, a human security analysis109  should be 
conducted and maintained, alongside audience and human factors analyses. 
The information environment must also be considered, with intelligence staff 
making a significant contribution to enabling the understanding that provides the 
focus for planning and execution of information operations activity. Commanders 
who understand the strategic narrative can then request target audience 
analysis (TAA) to identify the effects that they wish to create. Working with 
information operations staff, intelligence personnel will also consider potential 
negative influence outcomes in particular audiences, including those not 
deliberately targeted, when developing courses of action.
Human environment
5.7. Audience analysis. Audience analysis110  represents the fusing of 
foundation military intelligence (human terrain analysis, human terrain mapping, 
sociocultural analysis), human security,111 stakeholder analysis and audience 
segmentation. Audience analysis is defined as: the understanding and 
segmentation of audiences in support of the achievement of objectives.112  This 
108 NATOTerm.
109 See Joint Service Publication (JSP) 985, Human Security in Defence .
110 See also Joint Tactics, Techniques and Procedures (JTTP) 3.81, Integrated Action: An 
operational level guide to the audience-centric approach for commanders and staff , Edition 
3.
111 Within human security, this includes consideration of how and why individuals and 
groups are discriminated against by society and/or the adversary or as a result of conflict. 
This allows us to develop an understanding of how conflict impacts men, women, boys and 
girls differently and what can be done to mitigate this.
112 NATOTerm.

112
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
informs joint operations by providing a deeper understanding of all persons 
affected by and influencing an operation. Commanders and staff should work 
out how to synchronise and orchestrate all the relevant levers to impart effects 
onto the audience to achieve the outcome. Once this process has taken 
place, it is important that there is an assessment of whether the intended 
effects were created as expected and whether there were any unintended 
consequences. To mitigate negative second and third order consequences 
of military activity, audience analysis also identifies all audiences who will be 
impacted by activity, regardless of whether they were the intended target. 
Understanding audiences, their influences and perceptions is therefore 
intrinsic to the intelligence picture. Audiences are segmented into three general 
categories – public, stakeholders and actors – depending on their ability to 
affect our outcomes. This is illustrated in Figure 5.1. 
Figure 5.1 – Audience-centric approach
a. Public.  A public audience is defined as: an individual, group or 
entity who is aware of activities that may affect the attainment of the end 
state.113 The public’s attitude may range from hostile to supportive.
b. Stakeholder.  A stakeholder is defined as: an individual, group or 
entity who can affect or is affected by the attainment of the end state.114 
Our activities may encourage or develop supportive stakeholders to 
113 NATOTerm.
114 NATOTerm.
Stakeholder – can affect or is affected by the attainment of the end state
Friendly                Supportive                Neutral                Unsupportive                Hostile
Public – aware of activities that may affect the end state
Actor – actions are affecting the attainment of the end state
Attitude/behaviour
All audiences will have an attitude ranging from friendly to hostile
Will and capability
Partner Adversary
Neutral Enemy
RivalAlliance

113
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
become partners, whilst discouraging or denying unsupportive or hostile 
stakeholders from becoming actors.
c. Actors. An actor is defined as: an individual, group or entity whose 
actions are affecting the attainment of the end state.115 The spectrum of 
actors is further underpinned by attitude and behaviours: these may be 
friendly, supportive, neutral, unsupportive or hostile. Audience analysis is 
required to understand points of influence that may change or reinforce 
attitudes or behaviours. Changes in behaviours may be because 
of persuasion, or be short-term, because of coercion. It must be 
remembered that the position of individuals and groups within the range 
of audiences is not fixed and therefore the requirement for audience 
analysis is enduring. Table 5.1 details the spectrum of actors.
Name Description
Alliance
The relationship that results from a formal agreement between 
two or more nations for broad, long-term objectives that further 
the common interests of the members. 
Partner
An actor belonging to a declared, presumed or recognised 
friendly nation, organisation, faction or group sharing a common 
goal.
Neutral An actor whose characteristics, behaviour, origin or nationality 
indicate that it is neither supporting nor opposing either side.
Rival
Actors who are competing with another actor for the same 
objective for advantage without hostile intent and compete in 
accordance with the rules-based international order. Rivals are 
usually found in the rivalry zone of the continuum of competition.
Adversary
An actor whose intentions or interests are opposed to those of 
friendly parties and against which legal coercive political, military 
or civilian actions may be envisaged and conducted. They may 
have many different motivations and may be subject to a broad 
range of influences and are usually found in the confrontation 
zone of the continuum of competition.
Enemy An actor whose actions are hostile and against which the legal 
use of armed force is authorised.
Table 5.1 – Spectrum of actors 116
115 NATOTerm.
116 See Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine  (with UK national 
elements), Table 4.1.

114
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
5.8. The conceptual model of audience analysis.  Whilst Allied joint doctrine 
refers to TAA, Defence has identified three conceptual layers of audience 
analysis to support integrated action. These are baseline audience analysis 
(BAA) and mission audience analysis (MAA), which lead to TAA.117
a. Baseline audience analysis.  BAA is defined as: the foundational 
level of audience analysis to support planning and inform mission 
and target audience analysis.118 This is the underpinning analysis of 
audiences on which MAA and TAA can be based.
b. Mission audience analysis.  MAA is defined as: the focused 
understanding of target audiences in support of a mission or task to 
create the desired planning effect.119 MAA provides the depth and scope 
to support operational-level planning.
c. Target audience analysis.  TAA enables commanders to identify the 
effects they want to create; it also helps them identify the risk of creating 
any unintended effects. TAA is defined as: the focused examination of 
targeted audiences to create desired effects.120 TAA is an all-source 
process that uses psychological, anthropological and sociocultural 
methods to analyse state and non-state entities.121
5.9. Human security.  A human security approach should consider a broad 
range of security and protection challenges that individuals and groups of people 
face in situations of conflict, instability and insecurity from their perspective, 
and how military operations may affect their security in the short, medium and 
long term. Any adverse impacts on the human security of local populations 
resulting from operations may have second or third order consequences that 
work counter to our objectives. Human security considerations include human 
security factors and cross-cutting themes that the intelligence staff will be 
required to make sure the commander understands.122
117 JTTP 3.81, Integrated Action: An operational level guide to the audience-centric 
approach for commanders and staff , Edition 3, pages 15–16.
118 JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
119 JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
120 NATOTerm.
121 JSP 900, UK Full Spectrum Targeting Policy, Edition 5.
122 Human security factors include: personal/physical, political, food, health, 
environment/climate, economy, cultural and information. Cross-cutting themes include: 
protection of civilians; women, peace and security (including conflict related sexual violence 
and, sexual exploitation and abuse); children and youth affected by armed conflict; modern 
slavery and human trafficking; building integrity (countering corruption); preventing and 
countering state and non-state adversaries; and cultural property protection.

115
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
The biggest of the big ideas that guided strategy during the surge 
was explicit recognition that the most important terrain in the 
campaign in Iraq was the human terrain – the people – and our most 
important mission was to improve their security.
 
General David H. Petraeus
“
5.10. Enduring factors within the human environment.  Understanding 
the human environment requires us to understand the local population’s 
environment from their perspective. To do so, we tend to create categories to 
structure our understanding, but we should be aware that these categories 
would always be to some extent artificial and separate things that in reality 
are interconnected. There are multiple possible approaches but some of the 
enduring factors that must be considered are as follows.123
a. Culture. This includes beliefs and values, ideology and psychology. 
Groups have shared beliefs and values that ensure the loyalty of 
members to the group. These may include formal ideologies or 
religions, informal or non-codified beliefs about the nature of the 
world and of society, honour and loyalty. Concepts of time and the 
significance of history also influence how individuals or groups may 
act. Ideology typically refers to common ideas, language, rituals and 
theories providing a common bond for communities such as tribes 
and religious and ethnic groups. Assessments of psychology involve 
analysing the mental and emotional state and behaviour of individuals or 
groups; it concerns their motivations, fears, attitudes and perceptions, 
and how these factors impact on their decision-making.
b. Gender.  A gender perspective refers to assessment of gender-based 
differences between men and women as reflected in their social, 
economic and political roles and interactions, and in the distribution 
of power and access to resources. In many societies, power and 
decision-making bodies are dominated by a particular demographic and 
this is often male; this includes senior positions in academia, health care, 
media, the military and government. Therefore, a population analysis that 
does not disaggregate data by sex may be missing the female context 
and, for example, their leadership roles in communities. Understanding 
the gendered context provides insight into the movements, behaviours 
123 See JDP 04, Understanding and Decision-making  and AJP-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine 
for Information Operations  (with UK national elements).

116
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
and patterns of life for men, women, boys and girls and can highlight 
particular gendered vulnerabilities, drivers of conflict and gender-related 
early warning indicators. A gender perspective must be applied across 
the human terrain, such as understanding the differing gendered impact 
of religious and cultural practices and the social, economic and political 
organisation of society. Successful engagement with, and understanding 
of, men and women’s roles and responsibilities in society allows a more 
detailed and complete picture of the population.
c. Social organisation.  Social organisation refers to the basic building 
blocks of society. It includes the groups into which people are born 
and which influence their attitudes and behaviour throughout their life. 
Examples include family structures and kinship, language, history and 
religion. Understanding the forms of social organisation in the joint 
operational environment is an important step in understanding those 
groups with influence over how people behave and the groups to which 
they feel allegiance.
d. Institutions and organisations.  Power, politics, religion and 
economies work in different ways in different societies. The political 
system within a population may include global, regional, national and 
provincial systems, but not all groups need or want the state to organise 
them. The role of the military within a society, its relationship with 
the political organisation and allegiances can also vary. Large-scale 
economic ideologies such as capitalism or socialism have economic 
institutions and approaches that influence how people earn a living 
and obtain the things they need; however, societies may also have 
alternative economic structures, such as the shadow economy or 
bartering, or networks of patronage. Understanding how economic 
structures work is necessary for any operations involving or supporting 
economic development. Furthermore, the significance of religion within 
a society and the relationship between religious bodies and political and 
judicial structures can vary.
e. Technology and infrastructure.  Analysing the technology and 
infrastructure used in everyday life will assist in understanding how 
the environment is shaped by communities to suit their requirements. 
This includes physical items, such as communications equipment 
and infrastructure, utilities and transportation. Analysing technology 
must consider the level of scientific and technical development and 
supporting infrastructure.

117
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
A long-range reconnaissance patrol gathering information to help the United Nations  
better understand how to help the people of Mali
f. Physical locations.  It is important to understand the physical 
locations where people live. Assessments should consider the terrain, 
climate, access to resources, employment structures and the collective 
impact those factors have on how people live and the importance of 
specific areas and locations or activities.
5.11. Human factors analysis tools.  Analysis of the human factors of 
relevance to the operating environment is known as human factors analysis. 
Several frameworks exist to conduct this analysis, but one of the most 
commonly used approaches involves assessing political, military, economic, 
social, infrastructural and informational (PMESII) factors.124 Consideration of 
additional elements may be desired, for example, PMESII and physical and 
time (PMESII-PT). Another approach, for example, looks at area, structures, 
capabilities, organisations, people and events (ASCOPE). PMESII is a baseline 
tool and it does not cover the full complexity of human activities, but it can 
be thought of as an initial stage of the analysis required to generate deep 
understanding of the human environment that will be necessary if we are 
planning for human effects and actions.125
124 AJP-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations  (with UK national elements), 
paragraph 4.11. See also Chapter 7, Section 3 of this publication for detail on PMESII as 
part of intelligence support to operations planning processes.
125 For example, PMESII/ASCOPE is included in the British Army’s Planning and 
Execution Handbook  as the precursor to the human terrain overlay during question one of 
the combat estimate.

118
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
5.12. Virtual identity.  A virtual identity is an individual, common or collective 
persona in the information space that is different to that of the individual or 
organisation in the physical information space; for example, an online gamer 
known online only by their cyber persona or where a group of gamers have 
a single virtual persona. Actors may operate in the virtual world creating 
online identities to hinder tracing or pursuit. Some adversaries may undertake 
subversion or terrorism in the real world in keeping with their online identities, 
effectively giving them the capacity to commit violent acts they would not 
normally have contemplated.
Information operations
5.13. Information operations and the information environment.  The conduct 
of information operations is detailed in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-10.1, Allied 
Joint Doctrine for Information Operations (with UK national elements). The 
information environment itself is segmented into three dimensions – cognitive, 
physical and virtual – as illustrated in Figure 5.2.126
• Cognitive – this dimension is where cognitive effects affect people’s 
thinking, which influences their behaviour and decision-making.
• Physical  – this dimension comprises the geographic areas where 
audiences live, including all physical objects and the infrastructure 
that supports them.  
• Virtual  – this dimension comprises the space in which audiences 
interact virtually; the most significant aspects within this dimension 
are virtual personas, the infrastructure, and information and data 
exchange.
126 AJP-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations  (with UK national elements), 
Chapter 4.

119
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
Figure 5.2 – The information environment 127
5.14. Intelligence support to information activities.  An information 
environment assessment (IEA) is conducted by information operations 
staff but they will use the intelligence baseline analysis, human factor and 
audience analyses in addition to the intelligence staff’s JIPOE. This analysis 
and subsequent audience analysis product, such as an audience intelligence 
pack or target intelligence pack, informs the commander and bridges the gap 
between traditional J2 (intelligence) and actionable intelligence.
127 AJP-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations  (with UK national elements), 
Chapter 4.
Decision-making
Behaviour
Cognitive
layer
Social
layer
Physical
network
layer
Physical
layer
Geographical
layer
Cyber
persona
layer
Logical
layer
Psyche (attitude,
will, understanding)
Groups and
audiences
Physical network
infrastructure
Physical objects
and persons
Geographical
locations
Cyber
personas
Virtual objects
(e.g., software)
Cognitive
Virtual
Physical

120
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
Section 3 – Intelligence support to 
targeting
5.15. Targeting.  Targeting is defined as: the process of selecting and 
prioritizing targets and matching the appropriate response to them, taking 
into account the operational requirements and capabilities.128 Joint Service 
Publication (JSP) 900, UK Full Spectrum Targeting Policy is the policy 
document that must be followed. Targeting can be broadly divided into two 
types: deliberate and dynamic.
• Deliberate targeting  – targeting conducted against targets identified 
and located during the planning phase of operations and intended to 
be prosecuted on either a scheduled or on-call basis.129
• Dynamic targeting  – targeting conducted against targets known to 
exist, but which were not detected, located or selected for action in 
enough time to be included in the deliberate process.130 
5.16. Intelligence support to targeting and effects.  Intelligence is a critical 
enabler of the targeting process and is required throughout the whole targeting 
cycle to ensure that decisions are made considering the most up-to-date 
information and context.131 A sound intelligence foundation is fundamental 
for the delivery of targeting; timely, accurate and relevant intelligence inputs 
are required throughout the targeting cycle across the physical, virtual and 
cognitive dimensions. All-source intelligence staff will request and coordinate 
inputs from across Defence, allies and others to provide appropriate 
prioritisation. They provide the understanding of the adversaries, identify 
criticalities in adversary systems through the target systems analysis and TAA 
processes, and also lead the validation of targets at target validation boards. 
They further support advanced target development and the application of 
full-spectrum effects. There is also significant intelligence work to support 
collateral damage effects and/or understand other collateral effects. Planning 
for targeting assessment, support to battle damage assessment and 
measuring effectiveness should be refined and appropriate collection and 
assessment plans completed for execution alongside the targeting activity. 
128 NATOTerm.
129 JSP 900, UK Full Spectrum Targeting Policy, Edition 5, Part 1, paragraph 1.16.
130 JSP 900, UK Full Spectrum Targeting Policy, Edition 5, Part 1, paragraph 1.17.
131 JSP 900, UK Full Spectrum Targeting Policy, Edition 5, Part 2, page 1-1.

121
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
Section 4 – Intelligence support to 
operations evaluation
5.17. Evaluation.  In the operational context, evaluation is the observation and 
interpretation of progress towards desired conditions against selected criteria. 
It draws on monitoring, which is essential to establish an initial baseline.132 
Evaluation allows commanders and their staff to develop insight on successes 
or failures so that they can make decisions on whether to continue on the 
same trajectory or to change course.
5.18. Intelligence support to evaluation.  The evaluation of operations 
is activity usually led by J5 Plans staff, with J2 staff having a supporting 
role. From an intelligence perspective, the evaluation of operations typically 
comprises the following.133
a. Assessments of effectiveness.  A measure of effectiveness is 
defined as: a criterion used to assess changes in system behaviour, 
capability, or operating environment, tied to measuring the attainment 
of an end state, achievement of an objective, or creation of an effect.134 
Assessments of effectiveness examine whether the operation is 
achieving its purpose. They monitor and assesses progress, including 
setbacks, to support planning decisions.
b. Assessments of performance.  A measure of performance is 
defined as: a criterion that is tied to measuring task accomplishment 
in order to assess friendly actions.135 In partnership with other staff 
branches, intelligence staff at strategic and operational levels may be 
required to produce assessments that provide the commanders with 
agreed measures of performance. The focus for the intelligence staff 
will be the impact of joint operations. It normally consists of an informed 
narrative assessment by intelligence staff (for example, the success of 
the air campaign in achieving control of the air over an adversary).
c. Battle damage assessment.  Battle damage assessment consists 
of physical damage assessment, functional damage assessment and 
target systems assessment. It is defined as: the timely and accurate 
132 See Chapter 3, Section 4.
133 Measurement of activity is also undertaken but should not require J2 support.
134 NATOTerm.
135 NATOTerm.

122
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
assessment of damage resulting from the application of lethal or 
non-lethal force against an entity.136  Such assessment is supported by 
intelligence staff, but links into the targeting process. The production 
of battle damage assessments will generate a series of post-attack 
intelligence requirements. 
d. Measurements of combat power and combat effectiveness. The 
evaluation of operations may also include measurements of combat 
power and combat effectiveness. Assessments of combat power are 
more objective than assessments of combat effectiveness, in which 
subjective elements such as leadership and morale are considered. 
Combat effectiveness can be challenging to assess in a timely manner 
due to the requirement for collection discipline access, especially, for 
example, when collection might most appropriately be undertaken 
using human or signals intelligence. Combat power and combat 
effectiveness are defined as follows.
 o Combat power: the total means of destructive and/or disruptive 
force which a military unit/formation can apply against the 
opponent at a given time.137
 o Combat effectiveness: the ability of a unit or formation, or 
equipment to perform assigned missions or functions.138   
Note: this should take into account leadership, personnel 
strength, the state of repair of the equipment, logistics, training 
and morale and may be expressed as a level or percentage. 
e. Intelligence assessments. Intelligence assessments are critical to 
supporting decision-makers at all levels. In the context of intelligence 
support to operations evaluation, intelligence assessments have 
particular relevance in enabling the commander to measure progress 
towards mission accomplishment. They can include assessments 
against progress in the political, diplomatic, economic, rule of law and 
security spheres of activity, with specific measurements for campaign 
objectives and decisive conditions. The method and criteria behind their 
assessments must be coherent across the joint task force. To ensure 
coherence, the commander and staff design and agree measurements 
and assessments during the operations planning process. Assessments 
136 NATOTerm.
137 NATOTerm.
138 NATOTerm.

123
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
provide the information on campaign progress required before further 
higher-level and strategic decisions are made. Therefore, the joint 
task force commander must ensure that higher-level commanders 
understand the assessment system. Example measurement and 
assessment criteria may include: adversary capabilities, vulnerabilities 
and intentions; the impact of the results of elections or death of a key 
leader; economic progress; or the provision of basic services, such as 
medical care and utilities.
Section 5 – Approaches to intelligence 
development
5.19. Intelligence professionals are responsible for producing intelligence 
to assist policymakers and military commanders in making decisions in 
response to complex problems. A traditional approach is to use a linear and 
target-focused process, predominantly sequenced in the direction, collection, 
processing and dissemination (DCPD) order introduced in Chapter 3. An 
alternative approach described here is the problem-centric approach. This 
section provides an overview of both approaches, and they are explained 
in greater detail in Joint Doctrine Note 1/23, Intelligence, Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance.
Traditional and problem-centric approaches 
5.20. Linear approach. Traditional approaches to intelligence collection 
and processing are largely target-centric, whether against physical 
locations, electromagnetic signatures, individuals or objects. Targets are 
typically well-defined, predictable adversaries with a known doctrine.139 A 
predetermined collection plan is used to focus individual collection assets 
to collect on a part of an overall problem. The resultant information is then 
exploited by skilled analysts in a particular intelligence discipline. This exploited 
data is then disseminated in a report and often used by other analysts, usually 
all-source specialists, who combine several reports from different disciplines 
into a single understanding of a situation to satisfy the original intelligence 
requirement. 
139 Patrick Biltgen and Stephen Ryan, Activity-based intelligence – Principles and 
Applications, 2016, pages 10–11.

124
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
5.21. Problem-centric approach.  A problem-centric intelligence 
development takes a different approach. It task organises intelligence and 
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities around 
specific problems, rather than disaggregating elements of the problem across 
numerous, often disconnected ISR and analytical capabilities and then 
attempting to re-aggregate individual outputs from these sources, sensors and 
agencies. The problem-centric approach is therefore fundamentally about the 
task organisation of the full range of intelligence and ISR capabilities necessary 
to deliver a required outcome. Problem-centric intelligence also differs from 
the linear approach in that the processing, exploitation and dissemination 
(PED) phases of the ISR process and the process phase of the intelligence 
cycle are merged. Rather than numerous, linear PED and analysis processes 
occurring independently within a hierarchical multi-stage approach, all data, 
information and intelligence is pooled for all analysts to work on concurrently 
and collaboratively. Most significantly, it creates a direct command relationship 
between those that are conducting exploitation and analysis, and those that 
are collecting and processing. Collection and processing is task-organised 
to deliver the information and data needs that the exploitation and analytical 
capability require to meet the outcome required.
Activity-based intelligence
5.22. An activity-based intelligence (ABI) methodology is a means of enabling 
a problem-centric approach. ABI promotes the exploitation and analysis of 
all data rather than the analysis and fusion of end product reporting derived 
from data. It is an analytical methodology that seeks to integrate data from 
multiple sources by identifying entities and activities to discover the relationship 
between entities and surface patterns in activity. It then characterises those 
patterns to drive further collection and create decision advantage. ABI is a 
series of analytic methods. It is an inherently source agnostic, data-driven 
approach to intelligence that relies on a shift to Information Age thinking where 
data is integrated and exploited in a fundamentally different way. ABI aims 
to take all the gathered data, process the full range of permitted collected 
data and analyse it with a deductive approach. Importantly, data fusion takes 
place at the stage of gathering the information, not in the assembling of 
analysis for the final product or output. An ABI approach is predicated on both 
answering directed questions but also discovering what is important, even 
if the wrong question, or no question, has been asked – often referred to as 
‘unknown-unknowns’. 

125
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
5.23. ABI principles.  ABI is underpinned by four principles. These are:140
• geo-reference to discover  – focusing on spatially and temporally 
correlating multi-intelligence data to discover key entities, 
transactions and patterns;
• data neutrality – regardless of the source, all data is valuable;
• sequence neutrality  – data analysis is governed by correlation 
rather than causation – it is also the case that existing data often 
holds the answer to a question before it has been asked; and
• integration before exploitation  – correlate data as early as 
possible because seemingly disparate, unimportant data points 
in a single intelligence may be important when integrated across 
multi-intelligence.
5.24. Supporting analytical constructs.  There are two further essential 
processing developments supporting ABI: structured observation 
management (SOM) and object-based production (OBP). SOM and OBP are 
associated activities. SOM provides a common methodology and language 
for how objects and events are described and characterised. OBP uses these 
common descriptions and is the mechanism by which SOM observations are 
packaged and provided for analysis as individual data objects, for example, 
detected objects or events. 
5.25. ABI – applicability.  ABI as a methodology saw significant development 
during coalition counterterrorism and counter-insurgency operations in Iraq 
and Afghanistan.141 It is a tradecraft focused on discovering the unknown, is 
well suited to advanced multi-intelligence analysis of non-traditional threats in 
a big data environment, and it can assist in undertaking an audience -centric 
approach. Whilst ABI has broad applicability across all intelligence problem 
sets, the traditional approach is limited to traditional problems. While an 
ABI-oriented system and processes can be quickly adapted to address 
traditional problems, traditional approaches are not as easily adapted or 
transformed.
140 Patrick Biltgen and Stephen Ryan, Activity-based intelligence – Principles and 
Applications, 2016, page 9.
141 Patrick Biltgen and Stephen Ryan, Activity-based intelligence – Principles and 
Applications, 2016, page 6.

126
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
Automation of processes within the processing, exploitation and dissemination of  
information and data is an ongoing area of intelligence capability development
Artificial intelligence, machine learning and human-machine 
teaming 
5.26. Data science, machine learning and artificial intelligence are a series 
of technologies that support the ability of machines to undertake tasks 
normally requiring human involvement. In particular, PED is currently generally 
human-driven and the automation of some of this activity in conjunction 
with human-machine teaming and the use of algorithms will enable data to 
be processed more quickly. Additionally, with the right data and algorithms, 
artificial intelligence could enable ‘prediction’ ahead of events occurring. 
Machines can already either surpass or supplement human activity in some 
areas, for example, recognising objects in a photograph, translating foreign 
text into English, generation of text by large language models, intelligent search 
of vast numbers of documents and in transcribing audio information. Data 
science, machine learning and artificial intelligence approaches will continue to 
be developed through ongoing intelligence data exploitation programmes.
© Chim / Shutterstock.com

127
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
5
Intelligence and counter-intelligence support to joint operations
Key points
• Within audience analysis, it is important to analyse the audiences that will 
be impacted by an action, not just those we intend to target, to mitigate 
negative second and third order consequences that may impact on 
operational or strategic success.
• Analysis of the human and information environments must consider 
the human security issues that individuals and groups of people face, 
including across genders. 
• Operations evaluation is led by J5 Plans staff but requires J2 support for 
measuring effectiveness, battle damage assessment and for providing 
intelligence reporting.
• As well as the traditional linear approach to intelligence development, 
problem-centric approaches provide an alternative model and approach.

[Page 138: No extractable text]

129
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 6
Chapter 6 explains the role and specific responsibilities 
of the joint commander and the intelligence staff. It also 
describes the joint operational and deployed intelligence 
architectures. 
Section 1 – The commander, intelligence and  
                   decision-making  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
Section 2 – The joint headquarters and the  
                   intelligence staff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
Section 3 – Joint operational intelligence architecture  . 138
Section 4 – The deployed intelligence architecture. . . 141
Section 5 – Intelligence training  . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Key points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146

130
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
To lack intelligence is to be in the 
ring blindfolded. 
\ 
General David M. Shoup,
Former Commandant of the  
United States Marine Corps 
 
”
“

131
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
Chapter 6
Underpinning joint 
intelligence: people, 
structures and training
Section 1 – The commander, 
intelligence and decision-making
6.1. Commander’s responsibilities. The ultimate responsibility for 
intelligence rests with the commander. The commander should be familiar 
with the intelligence process and be able to articulate their critical information 
requirements to the intelligence staff. At all levels, the relationship between 
commanders and their staff is critically important for effective decision-making. 
Commanders provide the leadership, judgement and energy to focus the staff 
and the forces under their command towards the goal of accomplishing the 
mission. Commanders are the critical individuals in the planning and conduct 
of intelligence activities. They organise and assign their own staff, configuring 
them to meet their information, intelligence and operational requirements. It 
is the commander’s responsibility to: provide direction and guidance; define 
priorities; resource intelligence collection and production effectively; demand 
the highest standard of products; and review the effects of their chosen actions 
to ensure they comply with the law with regard to intelligence activities.142 
6.2. Commanders and decision-making. The commander provides 
direction and guidance to the staff to conduct their activities to generate 
the outputs required to support decision-making. Intelligence staff assist in 
making sure the commander understands the operating environment to enable 
intelligence-based decisions. Effective decision-making combines judgement 
with information; it requires knowing whether, when and what to decide. 
Mission analysis highlights gaps in information and intelligence, including that 
which is critical for the commander’s subsequent decisions. 
142 See Chapter 4, Section 5 and Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-2, Allied Joint Doctrine 
for Intelligence, Counter-intelligence and Security , Chapter 2, Section 2.7, for more detail on 
legal compliance requirements.

132
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
6.3. Promoting access to intelligence. A challenge for commanders is to 
focus the intelligence effort and achieve timely dissemination consistent with 
respective national disclosure policies. This includes ensuring the exchange 
of intelligence among all echelons and components. Access to intelligence 
capabilities to support mission requirements should be prioritised by need 
and established authorisation not restricted by organisations or command 
configurations. If a higher priority or competing tasks affect optimisation of 
intelligence activities, commanders should make alternative provision from 
within their assigned resources and/or request assistance from other agencies 
through their chain of command. 
6.4. Operations design. Intelligence fits extensively into the operations 
design process. Operations design results in describing ends, ways, means 
and risks to take to create effects, achieve objectives and attain the end 
state.143 Intelligence staff contribute to the development of operations design 
by providing intelligence, enabling the commander’s understanding of the 
adversary, other audiences and the wider operating environment to answer the 
commander’s critical information requirements. 
6.5. Support to contingency planning. In the military context, contingency 
planning means developing plans for potential military operations.144 The 
starting point for all contingency plans is to develop an understanding of the 
operational environment and the nature of the potential problem through 
the joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment (JIPOE). The 
intelligence staff will provide the commander with this understanding and 
identify gaps and associated intelligence requirements to drive the intelligence 
requirements management and collection management process. The JIPOE 
will provide the foundation data that is required when activating or revising 
contingency plans. 
6.6. Informing commanders. To maintain the initiative, commanders 
will seek to make decisions quickly. This requires the ability to assess the 
adversary’s decision-making cycle, identify opportunities for exploitation and to 
disseminate critical information. Intelligence directly supports commanders by 
producing assessments and reports that aid decision-making in the context of 
the likelihood of adversary courses of action. 
143 AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  (with UK national 
elements), Chapter 3, paragraph 3.1.
144 A contingency plan is defined as: a plan which is developed for possible operations 
where the planning factors have been identified or can be assumed. This plan is produced 
in as much detail as possible, including the resources needed and deployment options, as 
a basis for subsequent planning.  NATOTerm.

133
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
6.7. Prioritising capabilities. Intelligence capability requirements are 
situation-dependent and should be flexible enough to support non-lethal and 
lethal activities. Seldom will it be possible to have exactly what is required and 
there will always be an element of risk management.
6.8. Command–intelligence failures. The relationship and trust developed 
between a commander and their intelligence staff is a critical component of 
operational success. There are numerous examples through history where 
the breakdown of this relationship has led to operational failure. Defining 
intelligence failure is difficult, with many theories trying to explain it, however, it 
remains that failure can happen at each core function of the intelligence cycle 
and at the interaction between the core functions. The actions and behaviours 
of commanders at all levels set the environment in which these core functions 
exist, so it is relevant to examine how the commander interacts with them.
a. Direction. When tasking intelligence, the start point is often one of 
a lack of understanding. The reason for tasking is that the command 
does not know something and seeks understanding; however, a lack 
of understanding may mean that the wrong question is initially asked. A 
perfect intelligence product answering the wrong question will not lead 
to operational success. 
b. Collection. Despite the incredible advances of technology in 
intelligence, collection will only ever provide a glimpse of the totality of 
the information available and it is not possible to ensure that what is 
collected is valid and free from adversary deception. The processes and 
procedures within a headquarters and subordinate organisations may 
also prevent efficient flows of information both upwards and downwards, 
leading to delays. Commanders must be prepared to operate in 
uncertainty and understand that a perfect view of the adversary’s 
capabilities and intent is impossible to achieve. More collection does not 
always lead to greater understanding or better decision-making; indeed, 
it can also hinder it.145
c. Processing. Analysis is an act of judgement under conditions of 
uncertainty and is subject to imperfect reasoning. Commanders will 
always develop their own analysis and conclusions about events, but 
they must resist the temptation to become ‘their own chief analyst’ at 
the expense of finished, all-source analysis. They should encourage 
145 Min Zheng, et al., ‘How Causal Information Affects Decisions’ , Cognitive Research 
Principles and Implications , 2020, Volume 5, Number 1.

134
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
sharing and cooperation amongst the teams within their headquarters to 
ensure intelligence production meets the demands of the staff. Analysts 
must in turn understand the commander’s ways of thinking and other 
non-intelligence information flows to add value to decision-making.
d. Dissemination. Since perfect information too late is of no value, 
there must be structures and processes in place to ensure information 
flows up and down the chain of command. Intelligence must also be 
disseminated to the lowest levels acceptable to those with a need to 
know within the parameters of security. 
6.9. Command climate and reasonable challenge. The commander 
should encourage an environment of independent thought and intellectual 
empowerment, respectful challenge and creative tension to optimise the 
intelligence staff’s analysis. Commanders must be prepared to receive 
intelligence that contradicts their existing or preferred views. Situating the 
appreciation may result in commanders selecting a less favourable course of 
action based on their own heuristics and biases. The Ministry of Defence’s 
(MOD’s) Reasonable Challenge: A Guide fully supports the offering and receipt 
of reasonable challenge. Reasonable challenge is not about proving whether 
someone is right or wrong, but it helps to highlight and explore alternative 
options. Commanders and J2 staff must be prepared to challenge and be 
challenged when providing and reviewing intelligence assessments.
Section 2 – The joint headquarters and 
the intelligence staff
6.10. The joint headquarters. The primary function of a joint headquarters 
is to exercise control over assigned forces and to enable the commander to 
make effective decisions on their operational employment. Intelligence staff 
are an essential part of the headquarters and are involved in all its primary 
functions, especially support to decision-making.
6.11. The intelligence staff. Commanders and staff at every level require 
intelligence to plan, direct, conduct and assess campaigns and operations. 
Intelligence is crucial in baselining understanding, identifying and selecting 
specific objectives and targets, associating those objectives and targets with 
desired effects, and determining the means to accomplish the overall mission. 
The changing character of conflict emphasises the need to place intelligence 

135
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
within the wider concept of understanding, where commanders must get 
a holistic view of the operating environment. There should be a particular 
emphasis on the human environment in which actors, audiences, adversaries 
and enemies will interact, compete with and confront each other. One of 
the critical paths to achieving operational success is the organisation of the 
headquarters to make the optimum use of information and intelligence. This 
requires intelligence staff who are responsive enough to react to new problems 
and have the professional skills required for their role.
6.12. Intelligence staff functions. An intelligence staff should deliver two 
broad functions: manage intelligence tasking, collection, processing and 
dissemination; and intelligence planning and support to operations. These are 
explained below.
a. Manage intelligence tasking, collection, processing and 
dissemination. The intelligence staff will align intelligence requirements 
to assigned collection assets or reachback to higher-level formations 
or to the single intelligence environment (SIntE). This is followed 
by conducting intelligence collation, evaluation, analysis and then 
disseminating a product that answers intelligence requirements 
and offers understanding to the commander and their staff. This 
should be achieved across the maritime, land, air, space, and cyber 
and electromagnetic operational domains. This will support the 
commander’s decision-making and the staff’s estimates, planning, 
control and coordination of operational activity. 
b. Intelligence planning and support to operations. Intelligence staff 
will also conduct intelligence planning, enable intelligence operations 
and ensure the intelligence architecture can produce the information 
flows essential to the intelligence and intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance (ISR) cycles. Intelligence planning should be supported 
by staff delivering functional capabilities such as ISR, J2X, cyber and 
electromagnetic warfare, geospatial analysis and imagery intelligence, 
counter-intelligence/security and exploitation. For example, the 
Permanent Joint Headquarters’ (PJHQ’s) J2 Division has two distinct 
parts. PJHQ J2 Operations provides the headquarters’ analytical 
teams. The analytical teams set intelligence requirements, tasking both 
deployed forces and requesting support from UK-based elements of 
the SIntE, before collating, evaluating, analysing and disseminating 
assessments or outputs that inform Chief of Joint Operations and the 
staff. PJHQ J2 Plans provides the headquarters’ intelligence planning 

136
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
role, which determines the deployed J2 capability and architectures and 
has the functional teams that provide subject matter expertise in areas 
such as ISR, human intelligence and counter-intelligence/security.
6.13. Structures. There is a tendency to confine the intelligence staff within 
discipline channels or structures. The contemporary operating environment 
instead requires permeable boundaries between functional areas to obtain 
greater coordination. This coordination may be achieved by: integrating other 
members of the headquarters staff into some intelligence functions to broaden 
their expertise; integrating both J2 analysts and planners into headquarters 
planning teams and operational teams; and involving commanders in 
intelligence training to increase knowledge and to manage their expectations.
6.14. Reachback. Intelligence staff will invariably have limited resources 
and, furthermore, contested environments will drive headquarters to limit 
their footprint and prioritise manoeuvrability to help survivability. Therefore, 
intelligence planning should consider whether intelligence models based 
on reachback are applicable.146 Joint headquarters can base much of their 
intelligence analysis and planning capability in rear areas. Only a small team 
of analysts, and possibly planners, may be required to deploy forward with 
the commander. A joint headquarters may also have a heavy reliance on 
intelligence planning and analytical production provided by the Defence SIntE. 
The Chief of Defence Intelligence’s (CDI’s) responsibility for the Defence’s 
intelligence function has formalised CDI’s responsibility for directing and 
cohering Defence’s intelligence effort, focusing it towards better supporting 
operations and the warfighter. 
6.15. Intelligence staff support to the commander. Operations should 
be intelligence-driven and provide the commander with timely and accurate 
intelligence that supports their particular needs. To maintain the initiative, 
the commander will seek to make good decisions quickly. This requires 
the intelligence staff to be able to: assess the enemy’s or adversary’s 
decision-making and intent within the area of operations; maintain situational 
awareness and understanding of the area of intelligence interest and area of 
intelligence responsibilities; understand actors and audiences; and identify 
domain-orientated mismatches and windows of opportunity. They must also 
disseminate critical information that supports the commander’s understanding 
and decision-making and the staff’s orchestration of activities and effects. 
Table 6.1 summarises these responsibilities.
146 Reachforward models may also be applicable where rear-based operational 
headquarters require the experience and insight of the operational environment that 
forward deployed analysts can deliver.

137
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
Intelligence staff responsibilities
• Maintain a thorough knowledge of understanding and intelligence 
doctrine, intelligence capabilities and their limitations.
• Develop detailed intelligence plans and provide advice based on a 
sound intelligence estimate and intelligence collection plan, as well as 
providing support to campaign and other operational planning.
• Participate in all joint inter-agency and military planning conducted by 
the combined joint task force headquarters.
• Ensure all intelligence is set within the wider framework of 
understanding and it meets the commander’s requirements.
• Integrate national, theatre, operational and allied/coalition intelligence 
support.
• Build and maintain a dynamic, agile and adaptable operational 
intelligence architecture based on the principles of collaboration and 
fusion, optimising reachback.
• Synchronise J2 planning and operational planning for all operations.
• Develop and maintain an intelligence concept of operations that 
supports commanders at all levels.
• Ensure intelligence unity of effort and continuity to the lowest levels.
• Organise for continuous operations.
• Ensure access to intelligence.
• Continuously review all intelligence.
Table 6.1 – Intelligence staff responsibilities

138
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
The commander being briefed during Exercise Citadel Guibert 18, a British and French  
combined arms staff exercise
Section 3 – Joint operational 
intelligence architecture
6.16. Intelligence architecture is defined as: a structure that consists of the 
overall organization and hierarchy, processes and systems within which the 
NATO military intelligence structure interacts and operates with other national 
and international agencies and organizations to support decision-makers 
at all levels.147 The architecture should be flexible, optimise reachback both 
within an operational theatre and to the UK, and be tailored to the demands 
and circumstances of the operation. In the broadest sense, the intelligence 
architecture will contribute to enhancing decision-making, multi-domain 
integration and creating effects, and effective movement and sustainment. This 
will require the integration and collaboration of a wide range of sensors and 
collection capabilities, connected to processing, exploitation and dissemination 
(PED) units ensuring the timely and accurate exploitation of collected 
information and dissemination to the joint headquarters’ intelligence staff. 
6.17. Intelligence procedures should support the planning and execution 
of all operations by providing timely, tailored and accurate intelligence. The 
intelligence process should also allow a rapid flow of intelligence from all 
available collection capabilities to, from and across the joint operations area. 
147 NATOTerm.

139
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
The architecture must not only focus on the intelligence process, but must 
also allow intelligence sharing and engender trust, particularly in a multinational 
environment. It should provide clear lines of direction and promote an effective 
prioritisation system that is linked to the chain of command.
6.18. The intelligence architecture is a collaborative endeavour involving all 
members of the intelligence community. It aims to harmonise the intelligence 
process to achieve the optimal use of intelligence specialists, agencies, 
collection capabilities and activities to produce the best possible insight 
and foresight. The intelligence architecture is built on personal relationships 
just as much as physical capabilities. It is the overall space, conditions and 
surroundings through which the military intelligence structure interacts and 
operates with other national and international information and intelligence 
agencies to support decision-makers at all levels. Its success depends on:
• educating and training personnel and friendly forces, including 
Reserve Forces;
• making the best use of reachback, exploiting the Defence SIntE, 
UK intelligence community (UKIC), Five Eyes (FVEY) and North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) PED and fusion (including their 
information systems);
• maintaining pan-Defence, SIntE, inter-Service, cross-government 
and multinational links; 
• bridging boundaries between the maritime, land, air, space, and 
cyber and electromagnetic operational domains; 
• removing historical distinctions between the strategic, operational 
and tactical levels of intelligence activity; 
• driving fusion and integration at all levels; and 
• networking systems to enable reachback and the effective operation 
of the diverse competencies within the intelligence architecture.
6.19. To achieve operational success, the quality of the joint force 
commander’s decision-making and execution of operations must be 
consistently better and faster than that of their adversaries. Therefore, 
intelligence must not only be faster, but also better than the other actors can 

140
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
access through their own networks. To ensure that this occurs, the intelligence 
effort should be directed towards clearly defined intelligence requirements 
and commonly understood objectives, whilst fully embracing cooperation and 
coordination to maximise collective effort across the Defence SIntE and with 
UKIC, FVEY and NATO partners. It must also be enabled by an intelligence 
architecture, communication and information systems (CIS) network and 
intelligence processing systems that allows the rapid movement, storage and 
exploitation of data and intelligence products.
6.20. Command, control and communications. Achieving better and 
quicker information and intelligence than the other actors requires effective 
command and control over the collection, processing and dissemination of 
information. Command and control relationships need to be clear, especially 
about collection management responsibilities. Intelligence staff should be able 
to communicate with collection assets and intelligence users. Commanders 
should be aware that given the automation of intelligence systems and the 
need for reachback to the UK, effective CIS within the intelligence branch is 
critical to success.
6.21. Agility. Intelligence architectures must be physically and intellectually 
capable of responding to, and ideally pre-empting, an evolving situation. 
Before deployment, commanders should test the agility of their headquarters 
and the intelligence staff.
6.22. Multinational and agency integration. The intelligence architecture 
should be integrated, within security constraints, with multinational 
headquarters, other nations and national agencies. Multinational operations 
may not have a conventional hierarchical structure but may operate as a 
series of linked commands and responsibilities. Intelligence nodes may be 
established, for example, linking nations through formal intelligence sharing 
agreements, or groups of partners with common interests. 
6.23. Intelligence resources and architecture. Defence SIntE resources 
are only one part of a bigger equation. UKIC national intelligence is a 
multiple-source activity and all resources should be used, where applicable, 
to meet the operational intelligence requirement. Articulating the requirement 
and obtaining the resources are necessary parts of developing capability. 
When working in a coalition or NATO context, the UK should share assets and 
intelligence to the greatest extent, subject to the protection of sources and 
national capabilities.

141
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
6.24. Continuity. Continuity at the national level but, more specifically, in 
theatre, is necessary for the success of any intelligence endeavour. Once a 
force deploys overseas, it is vitally important to establish a long-term view 
and provide a properly constituted national contingent headquarters in the 
operational theatre that has an intelligence support element designed to 
achieve intelligence continuity.148 The staff for this headquarters must be 
carefully selected and expect to deploy in a pattern that ensures continuity.
Section 4 – The deployed intelligence 
architecture
6.25. Chief J2. Chief J2 is the commander’s principal intelligence officer. The 
relationship and trust between a commander and the Chief J2 is critical to the 
operation of a headquarters. Chief J2’s responsibilities include the following.
a. Acting as a focal point for the passage of intelligence briefed to the 
commander. This is likely to include, as a minimum, the commander’s 
critical information requirements, the joint intelligence estimate and the 
intelligence collection plan.
b. Ensuring the working relationships between intelligence staff and 
other staff branches remain effective. Poor relationships may hamper 
communication and information flows, thereby depreciating the value of 
the intelligence staff.
c. Maintaining effective and productive relationships with supporting 
partners within the Defence SIntE, UKIC and amongst allies. These 
must be relationships that are built on interpersonal skills rather than 
process. Chief J2 will therefore engage with the principal supporting 
partners within the Defence SIntE, UKIC and allies before deployment, 
and aim to draw the UKIC into the military planning process to enhance 
mutual understanding. 
148 Examples include the theatre-level operational intelligence support groups deployed 
to Iraq and Afghanistan.

142
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
6.26. J2 Plans. J2 Plans staff are the primary operational planning interface 
with the headquarters’ other J staffs. The J2 Plans staff will provide intelligence 
input into cross-J staff planning, refine the intelligence architecture and provide 
functional intelligence inputs. They will also contribute to a headquarters’ 
campaign/operations management process.
6.27 . J2 Operations. J2 Operations staffs are the primary interface between 
intelligence staff and the headquarters’ other staff. The J2 Operations staff will 
undertake analysis and provide assessments. They use all-source intelligence 
to deliver understanding to the commander and staff.
6.28. Intelligence requirements management and collection management 
and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance cells. The intelligence 
requirements management and collection management (IRM&CM) are critical 
as they translate the commander’s direction, planning requirements and 
intelligence-generated tasks into intelligence requirements. Intelligence gaps 
are then identified against existing understanding, requirements are prioritised 
and then passed to the ISR collection management staff for tasking against 
intelligence collection assets, which are both under command and control of 
the commander or are available within wider Defence, UKIC, FVEY or NATO. 
The IRM&CM staff should then manage the intelligence flow back into the 
headquarters so it can determine if and when intelligence requirements are 
serviced. ISR subject matter experts will: manage the headquarters’ ISR 
overlay detailing named areas of interest and the ISR synchronisation matrix; 
monitor the execution of organic ISR collection; and advise the commander 
and staff on the tactical employment of collect and PED assets. Depending 
on the operational design, this cell might be task-organised as part of 
J3 Operations.
6.29. J2 Targeting and effects. Targeting requires collaboration between 
intelligence, operations and planning staffs. A headquarters may need to 
employ a ‘J2 Targeting and effects’ function which could sit within either the 
plans or operations areas. Within the multi-domain environment, sensitive 
intelligence collected by national intelligence and the UKIC provide the 
commander with unique opportunities to create a wide range of effects against 
opponents and to influence actors, audiences, adversaries and enemies within 
the joint operations area. These effects range from targeting of opponent 
networks to the coordination of hard and soft power to achieve influence over 
and between audiences. 

143
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
6.30. J2 Analysis cells. The intelligence staff are normally divided into a 
number of specialist cells. These may include the following.
a. All-source analysis cell. An all-source analysis cell comprises a 
task-orientated production section that processes information and 
provides all-source intelligence products. The all-source analysis cell is 
directed by the Chief J2 to ensure that intelligence products meet the 
commander’s needs and that intelligence requirements and requests 
for information are addressed accordingly. The all-source analysis cell 
should have the ability to access intelligence at every classification, 
inclusive of any additional control markings; however, this is often not 
possible due to constraints imposed on intelligence of the highest 
classification and/or additional control marking. Where this is the case, 
a separate UK above secret working environment (ASWE) or national 
intelligence cell (NIC) should be established for the analysis of this 
intelligence and for briefing the commander.
b. UK above secret working environment or national intelligence 
cell. Each ASWE or NIC is structured to provide a mission-tailored 
all-source intelligence capability to meet the specific theatre and 
operational needs. Specifically, they provide the commander with 
access to national intelligence capabilities to enable tactical exploitation 
of their products, whilst also providing reachback to enriched 
Imagery gathered from operations over Libya

144
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
intelligence from across the spectrum of operations. Although working 
alongside the wider formation intelligence staff, the UK ASWE or NIC is 
compartmentalised to operate at the highest level of classification and 
can include elements from all J2 areas.
c. Coalition partner national intelligence cells. The UK has a 
requirement to access national intelligence at all levels of protective 
marking and so will our coalition partners. NICs are a national 
responsibility, but the requirement for their existence must be factored 
in during the planning process when the UK is the lead nation.
d. Additional functional subject matter expert cells. Other functional 
subject matter expert cells may also be required within the operational 
headquarters. These will advise which intelligence requirements their 
capability is most suited to service. They should advise how their 
capability can best be employed in both a collection operations and 
PED operations sense, including from technical, policy, permissions 
and legal perspectives. Additional functional subject matter expert cells 
could include: J2X, signals intelligence/electromagnetic warfare, cyber, 
geospatial intelligence, open-source intelligence, counter-intelligence, 
and materiel and personnel exploitation. The intelligence staff can also 
host academic subject matter experts and red teams.
The intelligence function is fundamentally a human activity with training at its foundation

145
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
Section 5 – Intelligence training
6.31. Intelligence education and training progression. The education and 
training of intelligence staff is an essential enabler of effective joint intelligence. 
Intelligence training should combine both professional training for individuals 
and, where possible, training with units or formations that intelligence 
personnel will deploy with in advance of deployed operations. Intelligence 
training includes not only training for individuals, units and headquarters staff, 
but also training for both generalists and specialists. 
6.32. Intelligence Professional Development Framework. Intelligence 
training occurs across multiple providers within the MOD and across all three 
Services and partner organisations. The Intelligence on Weapons of Mass 
Destruction Review led by Lord Butler in 2004 led to the establishment of the 
Professional Head of Intelligence Assessment (PHIA) team. This is supported 
by a Professional Development Framework149 that provides a framework for 
intelligence analyst technical skills and skill levels. There are four basic levels 
of intelligence education and training. They are: foundation, proficient, highly 
proficient and advanced.150
6.33. Language capability. The development of intelligence may require 
linguistic support. Military linguists require a high level of competence that 
must be developed and maintained; this requires deliberate capability planning 
within the intelligence community, for both intelligence development conducted 
in the home base and in the deployed environment. The cost of training may 
be high and therefore careful judgement is required regarding the volume 
and variety of a standing capability. It is possible that the intelligence function 
will need to draw on capability outside its own resources to meet linguistic 
demands. In a deployed environment, this capability may be obtainable from 
contractors and locally employed civilians; however, security considerations will 
require military linguists for some intelligence functions. 
149 PHIA, Professional Development Framework for all-source intelligence assessment , 
January 2019.
150 Skill levels are described in detail in the PHIA, Professional Development Framework 
for all-source intelligence assessment , January 2019, page 9.

146
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
Key points
• The focus of operational intelligence is to assist the operational 
commander’s decision-making by enhancing their understanding.
• Ultimate responsibility for intelligence remains with the commander, 
although Chief J2 is responsible to the commander for intelligence staff 
output.
• Commanders and staff at every level require intelligence to plan, direct, 
conduct and assess campaigns and operations. 
• The intelligence staff should deliver two broad functions: first, they set 
the intelligence requirements to assigned collection assets, conduct 
information and data processing, and disseminate intelligence product; 
and second, they conduct intelligence planning, enabling intelligence 
operations and ensuring the intelligence architecture and information 
flows to the intelligence and ISR cycles. 
• The deployed intelligence architecture will incorporate some or all of the 
following positions and teams: Chief J2; J2 Plans; J2 Operations; J2 
Targeting and effects; specialist cells, including an all-source analysis cell, 
and IRM&CM cell, and ISR cell; and additional functional subject matter 
experts.
• Defence Intelligence personnel training is now underpinned by the PHIA 
Professional Development Framework, establishing four skill levels: 
foundation, proficient, highly proficient and advanced.

147
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
6
Underpinning joint intelligence: people, structures and training
Notes

148
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 


149
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 149JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Chapter 7
Chapter 7 examines intelligence support to joint operational 
planning. This chapter outlines the role intelligence performs 
to support the operations planning process through the 
development of the joint intelligence preparation of the 
operating environment.
Section 1 – Preparation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Section 2 – Joint intelligence preparation of the  
                   operating environment  . . . . . . . . . . 154
Section 3 – Intelligence support to operational  
                   planning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Key points   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 166

150
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Although the process is disliked, 
a joint-interagency approach to 
planning is critical; it is the glue that 
brings players together cementing 
the relationships. It also provides 
a shared vision and means of 
achieving it. 
 
Rear Admiral Dave Buss, United States Navy
(Commander CJ5, Headquarters Multinational 
Forces Iraq, June 2008 – May 2009)
 
 
”
“

151
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Chapter 7
Intelligence support to 
joint operational planning
7.1. At the joint operational level, the intelligence process is one of the 
main activities that supports the operations planning process (OPP).151 The 
intelligence process is a continuum and the constant flow and updating 
of information within the cycle may provide intelligence that fundamentally 
changes the development and implementation of a campaign plan at any 
stage during the planning process. The complexity of modern operations 
produces a greater need for all-encompassing intelligence, derived from a 
range of sources and agencies to develop understanding of the operating 
environment. This relies on all available intelligence disciplines and analytical 
specialisms (for example, signals intelligence, imagery intelligence, 
open-source intelligence, human intelligence, etc.) and intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance for collection and the subsequent processing and 
dissemination of fused intelligence to satisfy intelligence requirements.
Section 1 – Preparation
7 .2. It is important to maintain core intelligence capabilities in anticipation of 
future operational requirements. This applies particularly to those intelligence 
disciplines that are not easily surged due to the long lead times required 
to establish resources (for example, specialist language training, technical 
development or source recruitment).
7.3. Initial planning. Joint task force headquarters staff provide the 
intelligence production and dissemination focus for operational and deployed 
force activity beyond the UK.152 These staff, in close cooperation with Defence 
Intelligence, are responsible for estimating an adversary’s courses of action 
(COAs), centres of gravity and vulnerabilities. At the outset of a campaign, 
intensive planning ensures that appropriate intelligence is available to the joint 
task force commander and their assigned forces.
151 The full operations planning process is detailed in Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, 
Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  (with UK national elements).
152 This includes not only the staff of the intelligence branch, but also the operations and 
planning staff.

152
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
7.4. Intelligence support to operational staff work. Intelligence supports 
development of all headquarters staff work outputs at the strategic, operational 
and tactical levels. Table 7 .1 depicts the hierarchy of operational staff work.
Level Output
Strategic
Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS) Directive
Joint Commander’s Directive
CDS Planning Directive
Operational
Joint task force commander planning guidance
Campaign directive
Force instruction document
Operation plans (OPLANs)
Operational and tactical
Contingency plans (CONPLANs)
Operation orders (OPORDs)
Fragmentary orders (FRAGOs)
Table 7.1 – The hierarchy of joint operational staff work
7.5. The intelligence and security directive. The intelligence staff should 
draft an intelligence and security directive for their formation’s element of an 
operation. This short, succinct and clearly understandable directive must:
• articulate the role of intelligence in the operation;
• define the area of intelligence responsibility and area of intelligence 
interest for the operation;
• clarify the planned intelligence architecture, command arrangements 
and information exchange requirements;
• define the roles and responsibilities of the operational intelligence 
teams;
• detail collection assets available and their tasking arrangements;
• outline intelligence agencies and their liaison arrangements;
• confirm the operation battle rhythm and intelligence reporting 
requirements; and
• detail the counter-intelligence and security arrangements.
The completed intelligence and security directive requires approval by the 
commander and is included as an annex in the overall operation order. 
Figure 7 .1 is an example of a Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) 
intelligence and security directive format.

153
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Content
Scope
UK national aim
Operating space
• Joint operational environment
• Joint operations area
• Area of intelligence responsibility
• Area of intelligence interest
J2 mission
Concept of operations
• Intent
• Scheme of manoeuvre
• Main effort
Specific tasks
Troops to task/workforce
• Assigned and non-assigned military assets
• National and Defence Intelligence assets
• Multinational/coalition assets
• To include: intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, 
counter-intelligence and security, cyber, partners across 
government, and wider Defence intelligence enterprise.
Force preparation
Oversight and governance
• Collaboration protocols
• Arrangements for fusion
• Security risk management
Command and control
• Chain of command
• Joint operational architecture
• Communication and information systems
Figure 7.1 – An example of a PJHQ intelligence and security directive format

154
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
The Pathfinders are 16 Air Assault Brigade’s advance reconnaissance force – training  
here on Exercise Swift Response
Section 2 – Joint intelligence preparation 
of the operating environment
7.6. The intelligence process supports all phases of the OPP , with one of the 
most significant J2 contributions termed the joint intelligence preparation of the 
operating environment (JIPOE).153  The JIPOE process is a disciplined analytical 
methodology conducted by the intelligence staff that produces intelligence 
assessments, estimates and other intelligence products to support operations 
planning. JIPOE is a three-stage process that conducts operational area 
evaluation, threat identification and threat area evaluation.
a. JIPOE informs joint planning by providing planners and 
decision-makers with a comprehensive understanding of the operating 
environment (CUOE) and the actors within it. JIPOE enables the 
development of a comprehensive understanding of the entirety of the 
operating environment, covering all elements of the political, military, 
economic, social, infrastructure and information (PMESII) spectrum 
set against the backdrop of the human, information and physical 
153 The JIPOE process is explained in detail in Allied Intelligence Publication (AIntP)-17, 
Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operating Environment .

155
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
environments. This includes identifying associated opportunities, 
potential threats and risks in support of planning and the conduct of a 
campaign or operation. It develops an integrated understanding of the 
main characteristics of the operating environment, including its maritime, 
land, air, space, and cyber and electromagnetic operational domains and 
the PMESII factors of the main adversaries, friends and neutral actors 
that may influence joint operations. 
b. The close alignment of the intelligence process and the J2 
contribution to the OPP through the JIPOE means that intelligence 
produced at any level can be used seamlessly throughout the command 
chain. This ultimately contributes to operational success by providing 
better situational awareness to assist the commander’s decision-making. 
c. The outcome of the JIPOE process forms the basis of the joint 
intelligence estimate and is refined and updated as planning continues 
through the OPP , as outlined below. It produces a dynamic product 
that focuses intelligence effort and informs prioritisation of intelligence 
requirements. In addition to contributing to the early stages of the 
operational estimate, the JIPOE underpins the OPP , execution and 
assessment of operations.
7.7. Joint intelligence estimate. The joint intelligence estimate is the end 
product of the JIPOE process but remains subject to continual review and 
development. Information received from all collection capabilities should be 
fused together by the intelligence staff to conduct a thorough JIPOE and 
will be articulated via the joint intelligence estimate. The joint intelligence 
estimate results in a forecast based on degrees of probability. It is a series of 
logical deductions drawn from the information available. The joint intelligence 
estimate enables commanders to decide how to accomplish their mission. 
As intelligence is collected, the joint intelligence estimate increases in detail 
and provides significant input to the operational-level planning process. The 
principal outputs of the joint intelligence estimate are:
• an understanding of the operational environment and actors;
• an assessment of the adversary’s capabilities, intent and 
opportunities based on the available intelligence; 
• identification of the adversary’s probable COAs and the probability of 
their adoption; 

156
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
• providing commanders with the intelligence required for the 
operational estimate; 
• proving the start point for intelligence planning by identifying 
intelligence requirements; and 
• highlighting the intelligence-sharing requirements between nations to 
support the operation.
Section 3 – Intelligence support to 
operational planning
7.8. The operational estimate is fundamental to campaign planning and to 
supporting operations. It aims to reduce a complex mass of information into 
potential COAs from which the commander will select their preference. It is by 
this means that the commander formulates a campaign plan. 
a. Intelligence staff support the joint operational estimate by 
undertaking the JIPOE to enhance understanding and resultant 
decision-making through the joint intelligence estimate. Intelligence  
staff must remain cognisant of the commander’s requirements as they 
evolve, so the commander must include the intelligence staff in all 
aspects of planning. 
b. The intelligence process does not work in isolation from other OPPs 
within a headquarters. To create the optimum effect, all the planning 
processes must be synchronised.
The operations planning process
7.9. The OPP enables the synchronisation of planning; it is command led,  
but intelligence driven. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO’s)  
Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of 
Operations (with UK national elements) describes the UK’s approach to 
operational planning via the seven stages in the process that forms the joint 
operational estimate. Figure 7 .2 summarises the OPP and the stages are then 
explained further.

157
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Figure 7.2 – The operations planning process154
154 AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  (with UK national 
elements), UK Annex D, page D-1, UK Figure D1.
COA    course(s) of action
CoG centre of gravity
CONOPS   concept of operations 
Operations planning process 
Initiation
Understand the situation
and frame the problem
Mission analysis
Factor analysis, CoG analysis,
initial operations design
Mission analysis brief
COA development
who, what, where, when, why, how?
COA analysis
Reﬁne and analyse COAs,
develop CONOPs, wargame
COA validation and comparison
Highest probability of success and
acceptable risk, viability testing
Commander’s COA decision
Commander’s decision, reﬁnement
of COA, Commander’s intent
Plan development
CONOPs and OPLAN for selected COA
What is the 
problem?
How could we 
do this?
What are the 
pros and cons?
Turn it into a 
workable plan
What have we 
been told to 
do and why?
Reﬁne the 
potential 
options
Make 
recommendations 
to the 
commander
Understand and 
strategic review
Concept development 
and reﬁnement
Decision and 
generation of plan
30% 50% 20%
Approximate planning timelines, 
(Many HQs allow more time for the understand stage)  
HQs     headquarters
OPLAN operational plan
OPP     operations planning process

158
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
British and French staff officers working together during Exercise Rochambeau 2014,  
a 14-nation multinational exercise
7.10. Stage 1 – initiation. Initiation reviews the inputs from the strategic level, 
higher headquarters and within J2 it initiates the JIPOE. The primary aim of 
initiation is to achieve collective and common situational awareness with two 
main outcomes: why are we looking at this problem; and who is doing what 
and why in the operating environment. Figure 7 .3 depicts the key inputs and 
outputs in this phase. Initiation focuses on conducting an operational area 
evaluation, threat identification and threat area evaluation, and will review the 
physical terrain and the information environment. Within the threat evaluation, 
the intelligence staff will seek to understand the adversary and conduct 
analysis of the span of actors within the operational environment. Threat 
integration will seek to identify adversary aims and objectives and will consider 
potential enemy COAs. Tools used by the J2 staff at this stage may include, 
but are not limited to: PMESII; area, structure, capabilities, organisation, 
people, events (ASCOPE) and/or diplomatic, information, military, economic 
(DIME) analysis; and strategic centre of gravity analysis. 

159
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Figure 7.3 – Inputs, outputs and staff activity during initiation155
155 AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  (with UK national 
elements), UK Annex D, page D-6, UK Figure D2.
I n i ti a ti o n
Plan the
planning
(Staff)
Timeline for
staff work
Timeline for
operations
Higher
headquarters
warning order
Strategic
intelligence
analysis from
OGDs and
agencies
Receipt of
orders brief
Directives
Analyse
strategic
context
(Commander)
Analyse
CDS directive
Analyse the
strategic
end state,
objectives
and effects
Appreciate
(potential)
strategic
risks and
threats
Examine
higher
command
planning
directive
(Commander)
Analyse
CDS/NAC
directive
Analyse CJO
directive
Outp u t s
Timelines
Commander’s
initial planning
guidance
Warning
orders
Clariﬁcations
Understand the situation and frame the problem
Unacceptable Acceptable
Initiation
JIPOE
(Staff)
PMESII/
ASCOPE/
DIME
analysis
Strategic
CoG analysis
Actor
analysis
Human
terrain
analysis
I n p u t s
ASCOPE   area, structure, capabilities, organisation, people, events
CDS  Chief of the Defence Staff
CJO  Chief of Joint Operations
CoG   centre of gravity
DIME   diplomatic, information, military, economic
OGDs   other government departments 
JIPOE  joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment 
NAC   North Atlantic Council
PMESII  political, military, economic, social, infrastructure, information

160
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
7.11. Stage 2 – mission analysis. The mission analysis stage takes the 
product from the initial JIPOE and develops it further. The commander’s 
principal intelligence adviser and staff play a critical role in identifying and 
analysing the problem through the conduct of the joint intelligence estimate. 
The principal intelligence adviser also helps the commander to identify 
their critical information requirements. By understanding the mission and 
the commander’s intent, the commander can direct the intelligence staff to 
begin detailed intelligence planning. Mission analysis will include: analysing 
the impact of the operational environment; identifying gaps in the deployed 
intelligence architecture; identifying the specific and implied intelligence tasks; 
reviewing the availability and capabilities of intelligence assets; determining 
the commander’s initial critical information requirements; determining the 
limitations of intelligence support; proposing acceptable risk guidelines; and 
conducting a thorough timeline estimate. Figure 7 .4 illustrates the mission 
analysis process, which includes the following steps.
a. Understanding role. Conducted by the commander’s command 
group, this analysis should include the principal intelligence adviser but 
this is dependent on the commander. Intelligence support to mission 
analysis outputs include the following: support to developing the initial 
campaign end state and objectives; support to centres of gravity 
analysis; and staffing of commander’s critical information requirements 
(CCIR).
b. Object and factor analysis. The intelligence input during this stage 
is critical. It is here that intelligence staff begin to develop understanding 
for the commander. The JIPOE and other intelligence products form the 
basis of object and factor analysis.
c. Commander’s confirmation. Intelligence staff can help to provide 
final confirmation of issues identified throughout the mission analysis 
step through the CCIR process.
d. Key outputs. Outputs from this stage include: JIPOE document; 
J2 support to mission analysis briefing; and J2 support to planning 
guidance for staff and subordinate commanders on COA development.

161
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Figure 7.4 – Inputs, outputs and staff activity during mission analysis156
7.12. Stage 3 – course of action development. The purpose of COA 
development is to develop a set of draft COAs in accordance with the 
commander’s intent. Outline COAs are developed by the staff for the 
commander’s review before being developed and further refined. The 
headquarters will be reconfigured into cross-function COA development 
156 AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  (with UK national 
elements), UK Annex D, page D-6, UK Figure D3.
Mission analysis
What is the
strategic
intent?
1 up and
2 up intent
and concept
of operations
Commander’s
initial planning
guidance
Directives
Initial JIPOE
Timelines
Do I have
the freedom,
capability and
authority?
Has the
situation
changed?
How might
it change
(risk)?Review critical
operational
requirements
Centre
of gravity
analysis
Factor
analysis
Operational
risks
Operational
effects
Operational
actions
Decisive
conditions
Assumptions
Outp u t sWhat is
my role?
Analyse
operational
end state
objectives,
missions
and tasks Estimate of
initial forces/
capabilities
and command
and control
I n p u t s
JIPOE
document
Mission
analysis
brieﬁng
Initial
operations
design
Planning
guidance
to staff/
subordinate
commanders
on course
of action
development
Commander’s
intent
JIPOE   joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment

162
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
teams, while the J2 staff also develop the primary actors’ most likely and most 
dangerous COAs for the staff to plan against.
7.13. Stage 4 – course of action analysis. Intelligence input to COA 
development and evaluation includes the following.
a. Conducting a review of the situation and environmental 
characteristics, concentrating on those aspects that have changed 
since the initial COAs were developed.
b. A detailed description, in priority order, of the threats for each 
COA from most likely to least likely and from most dangerous to least 
dangerous.
c. Intelligence staff support to any wargaming the commander 
requires.
d. Updating understanding through responses to the CCIR and other 
information requirements.
7.14. Stage 5 – course of action validation and comparison. The purpose of 
the fifth stage of the OPP is to validate and compare the COAs and develop a 
proposal for the COA to be recommended (and selected). COAs are assessed 
independently of each other against criteria established by the staff and/or 
commander. The COA recommended by the staff should be the one with the 
highest probability of success with an acceptable level of risk.157 
7.15. Stage 6 – commander’s course of action decision. During this stage, 
the commander is briefed on the COAs before making their final decision. 
The commander identifies what they consider the optimum COA is for the 
staff to develop in detail. The principal intelligence adviser has an important 
role in helping the commander decide which to choose. Subsequently, a final 
intelligence assessment is required for the joint force commander’s directive.
7.16. Stage 7 – plan development. The purpose here is to produce a 
concept of operations and operation plan. The concept of operations will 
express what the commander intends to accomplish and how it will be done. 
The operation plan will be in the same structure and format as the concept 
157 See AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations (with UK national 
elements), UK Annex D, page D-23, for further detail on the sub-elements of COA validation 
and comparison.

163
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
of operations but will be developed to include greater detail, including force 
capability statements of requirements. This phase also allows for finalising the 
initial version of the joint intelligence estimate.
Additional considerations
7.17. Intelligence support to warning orders. Plan development is a 
collaborative process within the headquarters and between subordinate and 
neighbouring formations. In general, development of a campaign or operation 
plan will require at least three iterative warning orders to be issued. The 
first warning order provides a basic intelligence summary at the start of the 
planning process outlining the operational environment and the audiences 
within it. Warning order two refines the intelligence assessment based 
on analysis of the joint intelligence estimate and the more holistic JIPOE. 
Warning order three refines this information further and provides sufficient 
understanding to allow the commander to make effective decisions.
7.18. The intelligence staff, wargaming and red teaming. Wargaming and 
red teaming normally occurs during the COA analysis stage. The intelligence 
staff play an important role by providing the overall context for the operation 
and representing the various actors, especially adversaries. In addition, 
intelligence personnel (usually from organisations external to the participating 
headquarters) often provide the red team.158
7.19. J2 joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment 
and alignment of UK and NATO planning processes. AJP-5, Allied Joint 
Doctrine for the Planning of Operations (with UK national elements), UK 
Annex D details the UK OPP , including the J2 contribution. Operations in a 
NATO-led operation may require the use of the NATO OPP and use of the 
Allied Command Operations’ Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive  
(COPD), which differs slightly from the UK OPP . The JIPOE inputs and outputs 
and synchronisation with AJP-5 are detailed in Allied Intelligence Publication 
(AIntP)-17 , Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operating Environment. 
Figure 7 .5 outlines the COPD, JIPOE and AJP-5 OPP phases.
158 See the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre’s Red Teaming Handbook, 
3rd Edition.

164
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Figure 7.5 – Synchronisation of joint intelligence preparation of the 
operating environment with the Comprehensive Operations Planning 
Directive and operations planning process159
7 .20. NATO and the comprehensive understanding of the operating 
environment. The CUOE is the combination of the information environment 
assessment (described in Chapter 5), the JIPOE described above and other 
stakeholder analysis (including external organisations). Within the NATO 
OPP , the development and application of the CUOE links to supporting the 
commander’s decision-making process and direction. Figure 7 .6 illustrates the 
development of the CUOE.
159 AIntP-17, Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operating Environment , page 1-10.
Initiation
Mission
analysis
COA
development
and decision
Plan
development
AJP-5 OPP 
planning activities
JIPOE inputs
and outputs
Initiation/broad description of the operating environment 
Direction and guidance – potential JOA, planning guidance, SSA
Nature of the problem/implications for NATO
Phase 1
Indications
and warnings
Actors’ centres of gravity
Broad actors’ COA
Operational design, precondition for success, planning guidance
Phase 3a
Mission
analysis
Reﬁned actors’ COAs
Decision on blue COA, commander’s intent
Phase 3b
COA
development
Description/evaluation of the operating environment
Current actors’ situation
Actors’ capabilities
Strategic potential risks, threats
Appreciation of potential strategic ends, ways and means
Phase 2
Operational
appreciation
of the strategic
environment
Current products of joint intelligence estimate
CONOPS, CJSOR, TJSOR, ROEREQ, OPLAN
Phase 4
Operational plan
development
COPD
phases
direction and guidance
AJP Allied joint publication
CJSOR combined joint statement of requirements 
COA course of action
CONOPS concept of operations 
COPD Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive 
JIPOE  joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment
JOA joint operations area 
OPLAN operations plan 
OPP operations planning process 
ROEREQ rule-of-engagement request 
SSA Supreme Allied Commander Europe’s (SACEUR’s) strategic assessment
TCSOR theatre capability statement of requirements

165
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Depth of understanding to support
the application of a capability
Target audience analysis
Commander’s direction and guidance
Warning order
Fused
understanding
Commander’s
optional
visualisation
Mission
analysis
summary
Mission and
commander’s
intent
Planning
guidance
Information environment (analysis)
Baseline
analysis
Country
briefs
Framework
briefs
Historical
analysis
Behaviour
baseline
Cultural, social
+ gender baseline
Monitors
and warning
Behaviour
driver assessment
Assessment and
evaluation criteria
Cultural and
social analysis
Institution analysis
Gender analysis
Information
systems analysis
Physical terrain
analysis
Human factor
analysis
Narrative
analysis
Hostile comms
analysis
Own comms
analysis
Earned
comms
Communications
analysis
Orientation and
link analysis
Audience
segmentation
Cognitive effect
determination
Potential target
audiences
Audience
analysis
Cognitive effect
analysis
Capability,
opportunity,
motivation and
behaviour
analysis
Monitors
and warning
Behaviour
analysis
Cognitive
assessment
Assessment
Joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment (JIPOE)
Threat evaluation
Adversary analysis
Actor analysis
Threat integration
Adversary aims + objectives
Adversary COAs
Area evaluation
Physical terrain analysis
Comprehensive understanding of the operating environment ( CUOE)
Threat
assessment
Physical
terrain analysis
Audience
assessment
Communications
assessment
Psychological
assessment
Mission
analysis
Other stakeholder
assessment
Operations
assessment
Other stakeholder analysis
External stakeholders analysis
Internal stakeholders analysis
Capability analysis
Mission analysis
Operational design analysis
Mission analysis
Operations
assessment
Figure 7.6 – Comprehensive understanding of the operating environment160
160 AJP-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations (with UK national elements), Figure 4.8. The development of the CUOE is described 
in greater detail in AJP-10.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Information Operations (with UK national elements).

166
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
7
Intelligence support to joint operational planning
Key points
• It is important to prepare for future operations through maintaining core 
intelligence capabilities and skill sets in anticipation of future requirements.
• Intelligence supports the development of all headquarters staff work 
outputs at the strategic, operational and tactical levels.
• The intelligence staff should draft an intelligence and security directive for 
their formation’s element of an operation.
• The intelligence process supports all phases of the OPP; one of the most 
significant intelligence contributions is the JIPOE.
• The end product of the JIPOE is the joint intelligence estimate.
• The first main intelligence contribution to the seven-stage joint operational 
estimate is during stage one – initiation – which focuses on conducting 
an operational area evaluation, threat identification and threat area 
evaluation.
• The second contribution to the joint operational estimate is in stage two – 
mission analysis. Principal intelligence outputs are the JIPOE document, 
J2 support to the mission analysis briefing, and J2 support to planning 
guidance for staff and subordinate commanders on subsequent COA 
development.
• Operations in a NATO environment may require J2 staff to use the Allied 
Command Operations’ COPD planning process rather than UK OPP; 
although similar, there are differences. Additional references are AJP-5, 
Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations  (with UK national 
elements), and AIntP-17 , Joint Intelligence Preparation of the Operating 
Environment. 
• A further NATO process is the development of the CUOE. The CUOE is a 
combination of the information environment assessment, the JIPOE and 
other stakeholder analysis/engagement.

167
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
ABI activity-based intelligence
ACINT acoustic intelligence
AIntP Allied intelligence publication
AJP Allied joint publication
ASCOPE area, structures, capabilities, organisations, people and  
 events
ASWE above secret working environment
BAA baseline audience analysis
CBRN chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
CCIR commander’s critical information requirement
CDI Chief of Defence Intelligence
CDPA Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
CHINT cultural heritage intelligence
CI counter-intelligence
CI-INTREP counter-intelligence intelligence report
CI-INTSUM counter-intelligence intelligence summary
CI-SUPINTREP counter-intelligence supplementary intelligence report
CICA Counter-Intelligence Coordinating Authority
CIG Current Intelligence Group
CIS communication and information systems
CJO Chief of Joint Operations
COA course of action
COAS Cabinet Office Assessments Staff
Comd UKStratCom Commander Strategic Command
COMINT communications intelligence
COPD Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive
CPERS captured persons
CRL collection requirements list
CUOE comprehensive understanding of the operating  
 environment

168
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
DCDC Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
DCPD direction, collection, processing and dissemination
DIME diplomatic, information, military, economic
EAU Extremism Analysis Unit
ECHR European Convention on Human Rights
EEI essential elements of information
ELINT electromagnetic intelligence
FCDO Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
FVEY Five Eyes
GCHQ Government Communications Headquarters
GEOINT geospatial intelligence 
HUMINT human intelligence
IAC international armed conflict
IEA information environment assessment
IHRL international human rights law
IMINT imagery intelligence
INTREP intelligence report
INTSUM intelligence summary
IPA Investigatory Powers Act
IRM intelligence requirements management
IRM&CM intelligence requirements management and collection  
 management
ISR intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
JDN joint doctrine note
JDP joint doctrine publication
JIC Joint Intelligence Committee
JIO Joint Intelligence Organisation
JIPOE joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment
JISR joint intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
JOA joint operations area
JSP joint Service publication
JSTAT Joint State Threats Assessment Team
JTAC Joint Terrorism Analysis Centre
JTTP joint tactics, techniques and procedures

169
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
LOAC law of armed conflict
MAA mission audience analysis
MASINT measurement and signature intelligence
MDI multi-domain integration
MOD Ministry of Defence
MPE materiel and personnel exploitation
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NCA National Crime Agency
NCSC National Cyber Security Centre
NIAC non-international armed conflict
NIC national intelligence cell
NSA National Security Adviser
NSC National Security Council
OBP object-based production
OPP operations planning process
OSINT open-source intelligence
PAI publicly available information
PED processing, exploitation and dissemination
PHIA Professional Head of Intelligence Assessment
PIR priority information requirement
PJHQ Permanent Joint Headquarters
PMESII political, military, economic, social, infrastructure and  
 information
PMESII-PT political, military, economic, social, infrastructure and  
 information and physical and time
RFI request for information
RIPA Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 
ROE rules of engagement
SATs structured analytical techniques
SIGINT signals intelligence
SIntE single intelligence environment
SIR specific intelligence requirement
SIS Secret Intelligence Service
SOM structured observation management
SUPINTREP supplementary intelligence report

170
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
TAA target audience analysis
TCPED task, collect, process, exploit and disseminate
TESSOC terrorism, espionage, subversion, sabotage and  
 organised crime
UKIC UK intelligence community
UN United Nations

171
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
Section 2 – Terms and definitions
This section is divided into three parts. First, we list definitions modified by this 
publication which will be updated in JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement 
to NATOTerm. Second, we list endorsed terms and definitions.
Modified definitions
multiple-source intelligence  
The deliberate application of two or more discrete but supporting intelligence 
disciplines, seeking to improve the quality of the intelligence product.  
Note: Supporting intelligence disciplines include, for example, geospatial 
intelligence, human intelligence and signals intelligence. (JDP 2-00, 4th Edition)
Endorsed definitions
acoustic intelligence 
Intelligence derived from acoustic signals or emissions. (NATOTerm)
actor 
An individual, group or entity whose actions are affecting the attainment of the 
end state. (NATOTerm)
agency 
In intelligence usage, an organization or individual engaged in collecting and/or 
processing information. (NATOTerm)
all-source intelligence 
Intelligence produced using all available sources and agencies. (NATOTerm)
analysis 
In intelligence usage, an activity in the processing phase of the intelligence 
cycle in which information is subjected to review in order to identify significant 
facts for subsequent interpretation.  
Note: The analysis identifies and extracts the pieces of information relevant to 
the intelligence requirement. (NATOTerm)
applied intelligence 
Intelligence which is tailored to provide direct support to the decision-making 
process. (JDP 0-01.1)

172
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
area of intelligence interest 
A geographical area for which commanders require intelligence on the factors 
and developments that may affect the outcome of operations. (NATOTerm)
area of intelligence responsibility 
A geographical area allocated to a commander, in which the commander is 
responsible for the provision of intelligence. (NATOTerm)
audience 
An individual, group or entity whose interpretation of events and subsequent 
behaviour may affect the attainment of the end state.  
Note: The audience may consist of publics, stakeholders and actors. 
(NATOTerm)
audience analysis 
The understanding and segmentation of audiences in support of the 
achievement of objectives. (NATOTerm)
baseline audience analysis 
The foundational level of audience analysis to support planning and inform 
mission and target audience analysis. (JDP 0-01.1)
basic intelligence 
Intelligence derived from any source, that may be used as reference material 
for planning and as a basis for processing subsequent information or 
intelligence.  
Note: Basic intelligence is fused from all available data, information, joint 
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance results, single-source intelligence 
and all-source intelligence and it is fundamental to current intelligence. 
(NATOTerm)
battle damage assessment 
The timely and accurate assessment of damage resulting from the application 
of lethal or non-lethal force against an entity. (NATOTerm)
chemical exploitation 
Provides chemical intelligence on, improvised weapons and unknown 
substances by processing, examining and analysing samples of materials.  
(JDP 0-01.1) 

173
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
collation 
In intelligence usage, an activity in the processing phase of the intelligence cycle 
in which the grouping together of related items of information provides a record 
of events and facilitates further processing. (NATOTerm)
collection  
The gathering and exploitation of data and information by specialists and 
agencies and the delivery of the results obtained to the appropriate processing 
unit for use in the production of intelligence. (Awaiting approval by the MCJSB)
collection management 
In intelligence usage, the process of satisfying collection requirements by 
tasking, requesting or coordinating with appropriate collection sources or 
agencies, monitoring results and re-tasking, as required. (NATOTerm)
combat effectiveness 
The ability of a unit or formation, or equipment to perform assigned missions or 
functions.  
Note: This should take into account leadership, personnel strength, the state of 
repair of the equipment, logistics, training and morale and may be expressed as 
a level or percentage. (NATOTerm) 
combat power 
The total means of destructive and/or disruptive force which a military unit / 
formation can apply against the opponent at a given time. (NATOTerm)  
communications intelligence  
Intelligence derived from electromagnetic communications and communication 
systems by other than intended recipients or users. 
Note: Communications intelligence is a subset of signals intelligence. (NATOTerm)
contingency plan 
A plan which is developed for possible operations where the planning factors 
have been identified or can be assumed. This plan is produced in as much 
detail as possible, including the resources needed and deployment options, as 
a basis for subsequent planning. (NATOTerm)
counter-intelligence 
Those activities concerned with identifying and counteracting the threat to 
security posed by hostile intelligence services or organizations or by individuals 
engaged in espionage, sabotage, subversion or terrorism. (NATOTerm)

174
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
current intelligence 
Intelligence that reflects the current situation at strategic, operational and/or 
tactical levels. (NATOTerm)
data 
A reinterpretable representation of information in a formalized manner suitable 
for communication, interpretation, or processing. 
Note: Data can be processed by humans or by automatic means. (NATOTerm)
direction  
The determination of intelligence requirements, planning of collection effort, 
issuance of orders and requests to agencies and continuous monitoring on the 
productivity of such agencies.  
Note: Direction describes the first phase of the intelligence cycle. (NATOTerm)
dissemination  
The timely conveyance of intelligence, in appropriate forms and means, to 
those who need it.  
Note: Dissemination describes the fourth phase of the intelligence cycle. 
(NATOTerm)
electromagnetic intelligence 
Intelligence derived from electromagnetic non-communications transmissions 
by other than intended recipients or users. 
Notes: Electromagnetic intelligence is a subset of signals intelligence. 
(NATOTerm)
environment 
The surroundings in which an organization operates, including air, water, land, 
natural resources, flora, fauna, humans and their interrelations. (NATOTerm)
espionage 
In intelligence usage, an activity directed towards the acquisition of information 
through clandestine means and forbidden by the law of the country against 
which it is committed. (NATOTerm)
evaluation 
In intelligence usage, an activity in the processing phase of the intelligence 
cycle consisting in an appraisal of the quality of the reported information, which 
is key to determining the reliability of the originator or source and the credibility 
of the information. (NATOTerm)

175
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
fusion 
In intelligence usage, the blending of intelligence, information and data from 
multiple sources or agencies into a coherent picture in such a manner that the 
origin of the initial individual items is no longer apparent. (NATOTerm)
geospatial information 
Facts about the earth referenced by geographic position and arranged in a 
coherent structure. 
Notes: Geospatial information includes products, data, publications and 
materials based on topographic, aeronautical, hydrographic, planimetric, relief, 
thematic, geodetic, and geophysical information, including geo-referenced 
imagery and may be available in either analogue or digital formats. (NATOTerm)
geospatial intelligence 
Intelligence derived from the exploitation and analysis of geospatial information, 
imagery and other data to describe, assess or visually depict geographically 
referenced activities and features.  
Note: Geospatial intelligence includes imagery intelligence and the production 
or analysis of geospatial information; it underpins understanding, planning, 
navigation and targeting. (JDP 0-01.1)
horizon scanning 
The systematic search across the global environment for potential threats, 
hazards and opportunities. (JDP 0-01.1)
human intelligence 
Intelligence derived from information collected by human operators and 
primarily provided by human sources. (NATOTerm)
imagery intelligence 
Intelligence derived from imagery acquired from sensors that can be 
ground-based, seaborne or carried by air or space platforms. (NATOTerm)
indicators and warnings 
Intelligence activities to detect and report time-sensitive information on 
developments that could threaten the multinational force, including forewarning 
of adversaries’ intentions or actions, insurgency, terrorism and other similar 
events. (JDP 0-01.1)
information 
Data arranged to convey meaning. (NATOTerm)

176
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
information requirement 
In intelligence usage, information regarding an adversary or potentially hostile 
actors and other relevant aspects of the operational environment that needs 
to be collected and processed to meet the intelligence requirements of a 
commander. (NATOTerm)
integration 
An activity in processing phase of the intelligence cycle whereby analysed 
information and/or intelligence is selected and combined into a pattern in the 
course of the production of further intelligence. (NATOTerm)
intelligence 
The product resulting from the directed collection and processing of 
information regarding the environment and the capabilities and intentions of 
actors, in order to identify threats and offer opportunities for exploitation by 
decision-makers. (NATOTerm)
intelligence architecture 
A structure that consists of the overall organization and hierarchy, processes 
and systems within which the NATO military intelligence structure interacts and 
operates with other national and international agencies and organizations to 
support decision-makers at all levels. (NATOTerm)
intelligence cycle 
The sequence of activities whereby information is obtained, assembled, 
converted into intelligence and made available to users. (NATOTerm)
intelligence requirement 
A statement that provides the rationale and priority for an intelligence activity, 
as well as the detail to allow the intelligence staff to satisfy the requirement in 
the most effective manner.  
Notes:  
1. Intelligence requirements should cover the broad scope of information 
on the political, military, economic, social, infrastructural and informational 
spectrum. 
2. The military spectrum will be covered by the commander’s critical 
information requirement. 
3. Military types of intelligence requirements are: priority information 
requirements, specific intelligence requirement and essential elements of 
information. (NATOTerm)

177
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
intelligence requirements management 
The management function that develops, validates and prioritizes intelligence 
requirements, forwards validated intelligence requirements to the collection 
management function, and oversees dissemination of the intelligence 
products. (NATOTerm)
intelligence requirements management and collection management  
A set of integrated processes and services to manage and satisfy the 
intelligence requirements by making best use of the available collection, 
processing, exploitation and dissemination capabilities. (NATOTerm)
interpretation 
In intelligence usage, an activity in the processing phase of the intelligence 
cycle during which the significance of information or intelligence is judged in 
relation to the current body of knowledge. (NATOTerm)
joint intelligence preparation of the operating environment 
The analytical process used to produce intelligence estimates and other 
intelligence products in support of the commanders’ decision-making and 
operations planning. (NATOTerm)
joint intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance 
An integrated intelligence and operations set of capabilities, which synchronises 
and integrates the planning and operations of all collection capabilities with the 
processing, exploitation, and dissemination of the resulting information in direct 
support of the planning, preparation, and execution of operations. (NATOTerm)
joint operations area 
A temporary area within a theatre of operations defined by the Supreme Allied 
Commander Europe, in which a designated joint force commander plans and 
executes a specific mission at the operational level. (NATOTerm)
materiel and personnel exploitation 
Exploiting material and personnel by scientific, technical and specialist 
intelligence activities. (JDP 0-01.1)
measurement and signature intelligence 
Intelligence derived from the scientific and technical analysis of data obtained 
from sensing instruments for the purpose of identifying any distinctive 
features associated with the source, emitter or sender, to facilitate the latter’s 
measurement and identification. (NATOTerm)

178
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
measure of effectiveness 
A criterion used to assess changes in system behaviour, capability, or operating 
environment, tied to measuring the attainment of an end state, achievement of 
an objective, or creation of an effect. (NATOTerm)
measure of performance 
A criterion that is tied to measuring task accomplishment in order to assess 
friendly actions. (NATOTerm)
mission audience analysis 
The focused understanding of target audiences in support of a mission or task 
to create the desired planning effect. (JDP 0-01.1) 
open-source intelligence 
Intelligence derived from publicly available information, as well as other 
unclassified information that has limited public distribution or access. (NATOTerm)
operational intelligence  
Intelligence required for the planning and conduct of campaigns at the 
operational level. (NATOTerm)
organized crime 
Sustained illegal activities by an enterprise or group of persons, irrespective 
of national borders, and that have as their primary purpose the generation of 
profits. (NATOterm)
priority intelligence requirement 
An intelligence requirement for which the commander has an anticipated and 
stated priority in their task of planning and decision-making. (NATOTerm)
processing  
In joint intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance usage, the conversion of 
collected data and information into appropriate readable or useable formats 
that enable further exploitation, storage or dissemination.  
Note: Processing is the third step in the joint intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance process that consists in the following five steps: task, collect, 
process, exploit and disseminate. (NATOTerm)
public 
An individual, group or entity who is aware of activities that may affect the 
attainment of the end state. (NATOTerm)

179
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
reconnaissance 
A mission undertaken to obtain, by visual observation or other detection 
methods, information about the activities and resources of an adversary or 
to obtain data concerning the meteorological, hydrographical or geographic 
characteristics of a particular area. (NATOTerm)
sabotage 
In intelligence usage, acts intended to injure, interfere with, or cause physical 
damage in order to assist an adversary or to further a subversive political 
objective. (NATOTerm)
scientific and technical intelligence 
Intelligence derived from foreign developments in basic and applied 
scientific and technical research and development, including engineering 
and production techniques, new technology, weapons systems and their 
capabilities. (NATOTerm)
security 
The condition achieved when designated information, materiel, personnel, 
activities and installations are protected against espionage, sabotage, 
subversion, terrorism and damage, as well as against loss or unauthorized 
disclosure. (NATOTerm)
security intelligence 
Intelligence on the identity, capabilities and intentions of hostile organizations 
or individuals who are or may be engaged in espionage, sabotage, subversion, 
terrorism and organized crime. (NATOTerm)
signals intelligence 
Intelligence derived from electromagnetic signals or emissions.  
Note: the main subcategories of signals intelligence are communications 
intelligence and electromagnetic intelligence. (NATOTerm)
situational awareness 
The knowledge of the elements in the battlespace necessary to make 
well-informed decisions. (NATOTerm)
source 
In intelligence usage, a person from whom or thing from which information can 
be obtained. (NATOTerm)

180
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
specific intelligence requirement 
An intelligence requirement that supports and complements each priority 
intelligence requirement and provides a more detailed description of the 
requirement. (NATOTerm)
stakeholder 
An individual, group or entity who can affect or is affected by the attainment of 
the end state. (NATOTerm)
strategic intelligence 
Intelligence required for the formation of policy, military planning and the 
provision of indications and warning at the national and/or international levels. 
(NATOTerm)
subversion 
Action or a coordinated set of actions of any nature intended to weaken 
the military, economic or political strength of an established authority by 
undermining the morale, loyalty or reliability of its members. (NATOTerm)
surveillance 
The systematic observation across all domains, places, persons or objects by 
visual, electronic, photographic or other means. (NATOTerm)
tactical intelligence 
Intelligence required for the planning and execution of operations at the tactical 
level. (NATOTerm)
target 
1. In intelligence usage, a country, area, installation agency or person against 
which intelligence activities are directed. (NATOTerm) 
2. An area, infrastructure, object, audience or organization against which 
activities can be directed to create desired effects. (NATOTerm)
target audience analysis 
The focused examination of targeted audiences to create desired effects. 
(NATOTerm)
targeting 
The process of selecting and prioritizing targets and matching the appropriate 
response to them, taking into account operational requirements and 
capabilities. (NATOTerm)

181
JDP 2-00 (4th Edition) 
Lexicon
technical intelligence 
Intelligence concerning foreign technological developments, and the 
performance and operational capabilities of foreign materiel, which have or 
may eventually have a practical application for military purposes. 
Notes: Technical intelligence is a subset of scientific and technical intelligence. 
(NATOTerm)
terrorism 
The unlawful use or threatened use of force or violence, instilling fear and 
terror, against individuals or property in an attempt to coerce or intimidate 
governments or societies, or to gain control over a population, to achieve 
political, religious or ideological objectives. (NATOTerm)

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2023Crown copyright 2023
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
The material in this publication is certified as an FSC mixed resourced product, fully recyclable and biodegradable.The material in this publication is certified as an FSC mixed resourced product, fully recyclable and biodegradable.


