 
 Joint Doctrine Publication 0-40 
UK Space Power 


[Page 2: No extractable text]

i
JDP 0-40
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-40
UK Space Power
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-40 (JDP 0-40),  
dated September 2022, is promulgated as directed 
by the Chiefs of Staff
Director Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre


Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via:
 
E-mail: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk Telephone: 01793 31 4216/4220
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2022) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated). Front cover © ixpert / Shutterstock
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbeywood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk
Distribution
All DCDC publications, including a biannual DCDC Publications Disk, can be 
demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and Operations Centre. 
  
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 Military Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet (RLI) at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/defnet/JFC/Pages/dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
ii
JDP 0-40

iii
JDP 0-40
Foreword
Space is critical to society, underpinning almost every aspect of life in the Information Age 
and is a vital component of national security, enabling our military operational advantage. 
It provides distinctive utility for Defence through the enduring principles of perspective, 
access, and persistence across a truly global arena. Potential adversaries understand our 
reliance on space and are increasingly able to exploit vulnerabilities, threatening our access 
to space and, with that, our strategic stability and security. In parallel, the exponential 
commercialisation of space means the domain is rapidly becoming more congested, with 
large corporations driving technological change, where in the past, only nation states had 
the ability to do. 
Space power is rarely used in isolation but forms part of an integrated approach comprising 
operations across multiple operational domains set alongside cross-government 
activities. Moreover, due to the nature of the space domain, collaboration with our allies 
and commercial partners on all space matters is fundamental to our collective success 
in the employment of space power. It is critical that as we grow our space capabilities, 
those charged with the employment and direction of space power do so with a common 
knowledge and understanding. Doctrine provides us with an agreed upon and operationally 
relevant body of best practices, principles and beliefs that articulates how we fight today. 
It is our collective wisdom drawn from operational lessons, training, and experimentation. 
However, it is not, and must not be allowed to become dogma, especially as space power 
continues to evolve.
Developing independent space power doctrine is fundamental to the UK’s operationalisation 
of the space domain. This first edition of JDP 0-40, UK Space Power provides a balanced 
and comprehensive unclassified understanding of space power which should be considered 
essential reading for a wide audience across Defence and desirable reading for our partners 
across government. 
This is a pivotal moment for UK Defence as we seek to operationalise the space domain at 
pace, so please share this widely and provide feedback. Space power doctrine must not be 
developed in isolation; all operational domains should understand and engage to maximise 
the opportunity we have ahead of us. 
Air Chief Marshal Sir Mike Wigston KCB CBE ADC 
Chief of the Air Staff


iv
JDP 0-40

v
JDP 0-40
Preface
 
Purpose
1.   Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-40, UK Space Power is the UK’s 
keystone space domain doctrine. Whilst JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine 
provides the broad principles and philosophy underpinning the use of UK 
Armed Forces, JDP 0-40 is focused specifically on UK space power. UK space 
power doctrine was previously encapsulated in JDP 0-30, UK Air and Space 
Power, 2nd Edition, but given the recognition by the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) and the UK that space is an independent operational 
domain, it is now appropriate for emerging UK space power doctrine to be 
articulated in its own publication.
Context
2. While space capabilities have underpinned military operations for many 
years, the 2021 Global Britain in a competitive age: The Integrated Review 
of Security, Defence, Development and Foreign Policy accorded a priority to 
UK space operations that has been reflected in the creation of the Ministry 
of Defence (MOD) Space Directorate and the establishment of UK Space 
Command. This first edition of JDP 0-40 therefore brings together UK 
government policy, strategy, higher-level doctrine and enduring space power 
knowledge and experience to provide a basis for understanding the utility of 
the space domain in the military context.
3. In line with UK doctrine policy, JDP 0-40 pursues a NATO-first approach. 
However, given the close ties with United States Space Forces, it is also 
coherent with current United States space doctrine.
Audience
4. This edition of JDP 0-40 is designed to be a simple and concise 
explanation of the utility of space power, written at the lowest classification to 
access the widest possible audience.1 It sits at what JDP 0-01, UK Defence 
Doctrine describes as the operational level and therefore avoids tactical-level 
detail. JDP 0-40 should be of value to joint commanders and staffs, the single 
1 It should be noted that this precludes detailed reference to some capabilities, practices 
and procedures.

vi
JDP 0-40
Services, the broader defence community and other government departments, 
as well as UK partners and allies. It is designed to appeal to non -specialists 
and specialists alike. For the former, it introduces the subject and provides 
signposts to more detailed study. For the latter, it provides a structure for 
understanding and describing UK military space power that is coherent with 
our allies and partners alongside a vocabulary of agreed, standardised terms 
that are a benchmark for wider use.
Structure
5. JDP 0-40 is divided into four chapters with a supporting lexicon. An outline 
of what is covered in these chapters is detailed below.
a. Chapter 1 – An introduction to space power. Chapter 1 sets 
out the fundamentals of space power. It introduces space and space 
power before discussing the space domain as a system. It outlines the 
characteristics and limitations of space power before placing it into a 
national and global context.
b. Chapter 2 – The roles of space power. Chapter 2 introduces and 
describes UK space power roles alongside the key missions that sit below 
them.
c. Chapter 3 – Space command and control, coordination and 
planning. Chapter 3 discusses how UK space command and control is 
conducted. It begins by discussing general principles, before moving on to 
cover specifics relating to the space domain.
d. Chapter 4 – The employment of space power. Chapter 4 sets out 
how space power is applied within an integrated approach. It discusses 
the three tenets of JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine, sets out how space is 
integrated with the other operational domains and then considers the role 
of space power in deterrence.
Linkages
6. JDP 0-40, UK Space Power is the UK keystone space domain doctrine 
within the joint doctrine architecture, sitting below JDP 0-01, UK Defence 
Doctrine and alongside other operational-level domain doctrine, namely: 
JDP 0-10, UK Maritime Power; JDP 0-20, UK Land Power; JDP 0-30, UK Air 
Power and JDP 0-50, UK Cyber and Electromagnetic Doctrine. JDP 0-40 is 

vii
JDP 0-40
also founded upon current policy, in particular, the 2021 Global Britain in a 
competitive age: The Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development 
and Foreign Policy (referred to as the Integrated Review throughout this 
publication) and the 2021 National Space Strategy. JDP 0-40 is coherent 
with NATO’s Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Air 
and Space Operations. It is also coherent with the Royal Air Force’s capstone 
doctrine, Air Publication (AP) 3002, Air and Space Warfare, 4th Edition.

viii
JDP 0-40

ix
JDP 0-40
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Chapter 1 – An introduction to space power. . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – The roles of space power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Chapter 3 – Space command and control, coordination  
                   and planning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Chapter 4 – The employment of space power . . . . . . . . . . 73
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

[Page 12: No extractable text]

Chapter 1 sets out the fundamentals of space power. It 
introduces space and space power before discussing the 
space domain as a system. It outlines the characteristics 
and limitations of space power before placing it into a 
national and global context.
Section 1 – Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 2 – The space domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Section 3 – Characteristics and limitations of space  
                   power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Section 4 – Space power in context . . . . . . . . . . 21
© Mirexon / Shutterstock.com
1
JDP 0-40
Chapter 1

”
“Space plays a critical role in our 
daily lives. Satellites orbiting the 
Earth only 160 kilometres above our 
heads keep us connected with our 
friends, families, and colleagues. 
They support our present and future 
security and prosperity, enabling us 
to navigate the oceans, keep our 
troops safe, monitor the climate and 
forecast the weather. 
 
 
National Space Strategy, 2021 
 
2
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

Chapter 1
An introduction to space 
power
1.1. With space-based capabilities now a vital part of both everyday life and 
military operations, space has never been so important. It does, however, 
remain somewhat of an enigma, acknowledged by all but understood by only 
a very few. Misconceptions, fuelled by popular culture and science fiction, are 
rife, leading to misunderstanding and exaggeration of what can be realistically 
expected from space assets. This chapter seeks to establish common ground, 
setting out relevant definitions as well as establishing the various factors that 
affect the space domain, alongside the advantages and limitations faced when 
operating in, from or through it.
Section 1 – Definitions
1.2. Space. While most could attempt to describe ‘space’, there is no 
agreement under international law as to the altitude at which airspace ends 
and outer space begins. From a practical perspective, outer space begins 
‘above the highest altitude at which an aircraft can fly and below the lowest 
possible perigee1 of a satellite in orbit’.2 This point is commonly known as the 
Kármán Line: a height approximately 100 kilometres above mean sea level, 
above which the atmosphere becomes too thin for an aircraft to generate 
conventional lift without needing to exceed the speed required to achieve 
orbit. Thus, for practical purposes, anything in orbit or beyond can safely 
be regarded as being in space.3 For the purposes of this document, ‘space’ 
physically begins at the Kármán Line but its capabilities are enabled by assets 
on Earth and, therefore, the space domain includes the satellites in orbit and 
beyond, supporting ground infrastructure and the information layer connecting 
ground and space.
1 The point of an orbit closest to the Earth.
2 Joint Service Publication 383, The Joint Service Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict , 
2004 Edition.
3 Ibid.
3
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

1.3. Space power. Space power is defined as: exerting influence in, from, 
or through, space.4 The ability to influence is critical to achieve wider UK 
government aims. The UK government pursues its goals by leveraging four 
instruments of national power: diplomatic, information, military and economic.5 
Under the military instrument, Defence considers space to be one of five 
interconnected operational domains,6 which together or separately provide 
options for the employment of the military instrument. Credibility, underpinned 
by a coherent strategy, plays a large part in the ability to successfully exert 
influence. This influence is pivotal to the UK’s ability to conduct integrated 
action, seeking to shape narratives as part of an audience-centric, integrated 
approach. UK space power is inherently integrated, containing military, civil 
and commercial elements. It can support all of the instruments of national 
power and, furthermore, while it can be used to influence activities in space 
itself, it is also used to enable effects and exert influence elsewhere.
1.4. Space and smart power. States are engaged in systemic competition7 
both with rivals, who operate within the rules-based international order, and 
with adversaries, who may not. States use a blend of hard and soft power, the 
sum of which is known as smart power, to advance their goals and interests. 
Hard power seeks to coerce opponents to adopt a course of action, which 
they would not otherwise choose themselves. Soft power, on the other 
hand, is the ability to persuade or encourage others to adopt an alternative 
approach. Space power can contribute to both aspects: it can support hard 
power either directly or by enabling other military action, but it can also take 
the form of soft power through building alliances and industrial collaborations. 
Space power can contribute to humanitarian assistance through environmental 
monitoring, through helping to provide assured positioning, navigation and 
timing signals or through research to better understand the impacts of space 
weather on terrestrial systems. Such activity benefits from collaboration, even 
with competitors or potential adversaries.
4 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
5 See JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine for more details.
6 Maritime, land, air, space and cyber and electromagnetic. See JDP 0-01,  UK Defence 
Doctrine and the JDP 0-X0 series of operational domain doctrine publications for more 
details.
7 Referred to by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the United States as 
‘strategic competition’.
4
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

Space as an operational domain
Space is contested by both state and non-state actors. It is subject 
to expanding commercial competition and is congested by a growing 
volume of satellites and debris.8 Increasing reliance on space, identified 
vulnerabilities and the perception of challenge in space necessitated a 
change of approach. The United States (US) formally established its Space 
Force as a new military Service in 2019. The same year, the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) formally announced it considered space to 
be an operational domain.9 This approach has been endorsed by the UK 
and is reflected in the Integrated Review. The UK has formed the Ministry 
of Defence (MOD) Space Directorate and UK Space Command, which 
support the National Space Strategy, not least by protecting and defending 
the UK’s space interests.
Section 2 – The space domain
1.5. An exponential increase in space activities has meant that space is 
becoming increasingly congested and complex. It is, however, critical for both 
UK military operations and UK society as a whole. In an era of competition, it 
can therefore be expected to be contested by adversaries.
a. Congested. Traditionally, the use and exploration of space was 
only undertaken by the major powers, who exploited space in support 
of their national interests. Competition over national prestige drove 
space exploration and the military was able to exploit the understanding 
and ideas it delivered, but space was viewed as a niche activity that 
supported activities in other operational domains. In recent times, 
technological advances have seen an increase in the available uses 
of space alongside the traditional barriers and costs associated with 
establishing space capabilities being lowered, triggering commercial 
expansion into space on an unparalleled scale. Commercial activity 
now covers almost all aspects of space operations, including activities 
such as space launch, that were previously only achievable by the 
major powers. Developing countries and other organisations no longer 
8 UK National Submission on Space Threats in response to United Nations (UN) General 
Assembly Resolution A/RES/75/36, 30 April 2021.
9 Announced following the meeting of NATO Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Brussels, 
November 2019.
5
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

need their own space programmes; capabilities and products can be 
procured on the open market. Such activities, especially the growth of 
mega-constellations, have drastically increased the number of satellites 
which, given they are typically concentrated on the most advantageous 
orbits, has dramatically increased congestion.
b. Complex. The blurring of the lines between civilian and military, 
government and commercial has drastically increased complexity 
in space. International collaboration, licensing and commercial 
considerations make ownership, responsibility and liability (and thus 
attribution) far less clear. These are compounded by challenges of not 
just tracking space objects but ascertaining their true purpose and intent, 
especially when only basic information must be disclosed under the 
international registration regime for space objects.
c. Critical. With provision has come reliance. Technological advances, 
underpinned by increasingly widespread commercial or dual-use 
space capabilities,10 have imperceptibly permeated society and popular 
culture to such an extent that they are now almost indispensable, but 
they are nonetheless taken almost completely for granted. Such is the 
UK’s societal reliance on assured access to space, the UK government 
considers space infrastructure and assets to be linked to critical national 
infrastructure, ‘the loss or compromise of which would result in major 
detrimental impact on the availability, delivery or integrity of essential 
services, leading to severe economic or social consequences or to loss 
of life’.11
d. Contested. In addition to the changes in the space domain, recent 
times have seen global geopolitical changes that the 2021 Integrated 
Review describes as a return to ‘systemic competition’ between states. 
Furthermore, while the UK competes with rivals who act in accordance 
with the rules-based international order, adversaries seek to exploit the 
seams of UK, allied and partner institutions and undermine their cohesion 
and credibility. Increasingly, such competition exists on a spectrum 
where adversaries seek to achieve their own goals both overtly and 
through clandestine methods designed to remain unattributable or to blur 
their origins and intent so as not to elicit a military response. Many such 
adversaries have space programmes themselves, can source capabilities 
commercially or have at least identified space to be a critical vulnerability 
10 Such as assured precise timing signals and readily available global navigational data.
11 UK Cabinet Office, Public Summary of Sector Security and Resilience Plans , 2018.
6
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

of their own adversaries and have taken measures accordingly. Space 
is now accessible to a larger group of both state and non-state actors 
whose intentions are not always honourable or benign.12 Given the 
identified reliance on space, and the potential threat, a fundamental goal 
of the UK’s National Space Strategy13 is to seek to protect and defend 
our national interests in and through space. Such defence must cover 
all three segments (space, ground and link) and not just assets in space. 
The link segment can be equally contested due to the proliferation of 
electromagnetic warfare counter-space weapons.
Examples of international threats: Russia and China
Russia has conducted a number of on-orbit activities that have drawn 
attention and condemnation from both the UK, US and other partner nations. 
These include contesting the electromagnetic spectrum, targeting the vital 
link between satellites and ground segments, as well as placing satellites 
in orbit that can release smaller secondary and even tertiary devices with 
the possibility that some may have a destructive capability. In November 
2021, Russia conducted a test of a direct ascent anti-satellite (DA-ASAT) 
missile against one of its own redundant satellites. The resulting debris cloud 
created in the region of 1,500 trackable objects, greatly increasing the risk to 
satellites in low Earth orbit (LEO) and the International Space Station, which 
at the time was crewed by a team that included Russian cosmonauts. Russia 
has also exerted pressure by denying launch facilities to OneWeb satellites, 
which are part owned by the UK government, in response to wider sanctions 
imposed following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.
China has a robust DA-ASAT programme. On 11 January 2007 , China 
launched a direct ascent attack on one of its own defunct weather satellites, 
the Fengyun 1C, demonstrating that China had the ability to target a satellite 
and could therefore contest control of space. China also possesses multi-use 
capabilities on orbit that are necessary for co-orbital anti-satellite weapons 
as well as a wide range of electromagnetic and cyber counter-space 
capabilities. China continues to conduct tests of its operational DA-ASAT 
system. However, China may no longer need to use kinetic tests to prove that 
its DA-ASAT capabilities can threaten any satellite in LEO, and likely medium 
Earth orbit and geosynchronous Earth orbits (GEOs) as well.14
12 Air Publication (AP) 3002, Air and Space Warfare, 4th Edition, 2020.
13 HM Government, National Space Strategy, September 2021.
14 Center for Strategic & International Studies, Space Threat Assessment 2021, April 2021.
7
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

1.6. When seeking to understand space as a complex operational domain, it 
is best to break out the interconnected system into logical component parts. 
It should be stressed that the following aspects cannot be taken in isolation: 
each affects and relies on the others.
Political aspects
1.7. Diplomatic. The UK government’s National Space Strategy15 recognises 
that space is of strategic importance to the UK, and it supports the growth of 
a competitive commercial space sector, which requires a stable and secure 
operating environment to thrive and to deliver the economic benefits sought. 
It commits the UK to preserving and promoting the safety and security of 
the space environment, as well as to cooperate internationally and advance 
discussion surrounding the responsible use of space. In accordance with 
the rights and obligations set out in the Outer Space Treaty, space is ‘free 
for exploration and use by all States’.16 Most international legal and normative 
frameworks recognise the importance of international cooperation in respect to 
space activities. 
1.8. International negotiations. The UK supports international negotiations 
as a further measure to prevent an arms race in outer space. The UK 
recognises two broad categories of challenges to operating in space. First, 
hazards that could harm a space system: these are generally naturally 
occurring in the space environment or are the result of space activities (such 
as space debris). Secondly, ‘threats’, namely those actions or activities using 
capabilities that threaten the space systems of another state.17 The progress 
made by the international community in mitigating many of the hazards has 
not been matched by international action to deal with threats. The UK tabled 
a United Nations (UN) General Assembly resolution in October 2020 entitled 
‘Reducing space threats through norms, rules and principles of responsible 
behaviours’ seeking to take a constructive step in international negotiations. 
This led to the adoption of UN General Assembly Resolution 75/36 by the First 
Committee that encourages states to broaden the international discussion on 
space threats, build states’ understanding of threats, seek to reduce the risk of 
conflict escalation in space, and share ideas on the further development and 
implementation of responsible behaviours. A further UN General Assembly 
15 HM Government, National Space Strategy, September 2021.
16 UN Office for Outer Space Affairs, Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of 
States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial 
Bodies.
17 UK National Submission on Space Threats in response to UN General Assembly 
Resolution A/RES/75/36, 30 April 2021.
8
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

Resolution 76/231 was adopted in December 2021 under this initiative. The 
decision was taken to convene an open-ended working group to take stock of 
existing international legal and other normative frameworks, consider current 
and future threats by states to space systems and make recommendations 
on possible norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviours.18 The 
UK government views international cooperation and its network of partners 
and allies to be essential to a collaborative space enterprise. This global and 
national context is discussed later in this chapter.
1.9. Legal. As in all of the other operational domains, military applications of 
space must be in accordance with domestic and international law. These are 
explained further below.
a. International law. The cornerstone of the international legal 
framework for space is the Outer Space Treaty, although it is not an 
exclusive statement of the framework applicable to space. The Outer 
Space Treaty reaffirms that space activities must be carried out in 
accordance with international law, including the UN Charter. This is 
important as it affirms that international law governs when a state has 
a right to use force. The Outer Space Treaty does provide that nuclear 
weapons and weapons of mass destruction may not be placed in 
orbit around the Earth, stationed in space or installed on the moon 
or other celestial bodies. This prohibition does not affect the use of 
intercontinental ballistic missiles carrying nuclear payloads that merely 
transit through space and do not necessarily achieve orbit or orbital 
velocity. At a fundamental level, the Outer Space Treaty establishes 
that space shall be free for exploration and use by all states, but that 
space is not subject to national appropriation by claim of sovereignty, 
by means of use or occupation or by any other means. These broad 
principles have practical significance and are in contrast to the 
jurisdictional arrangements that exist in airspace. To illustrate, consent 
is required for aircraft to enter the airspace of another state. However, 
consent is not required for satellites in orbit passing over the territory 
of a state. There is also overlap and interplay between the concepts 
of responsibility, registration and liability under international space law 
that have implications for military space operations. The International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU), through a collection of instruments, 
governs the allocation and use of both radio-frequency spectrum and 
satellites in geostationary orbit.
18 UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/76/231, Reducing space threats through 
norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviour , December 2021.
9
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

b. UK domestic law. UK domestic law seeks to fulfil a number of 
functions in the context of space operations. This includes regulating 
the space activities of individuals and organisations falling under 
UK jurisdiction and ensuring that the UK complies with its various 
obligations under international space law. These aims are, in part, 
pursued by virtue of the Outer Space Act 1986 and Space Industry 
Act 2018 and associated regulations. Effective regulation is essential 
to ensure that standards are set to improve safety, efficiency and to 
mitigate the negative environmental impacts of a rapidly expanding 
space enterprise. The UK’s National Space Strategy set the goal of the 
UK leading the world in modern space regulation. In July 2021, the Civil 
Aviation Authority was appointed to exercise every regulatory function 
set out in UK domestic space law. Regulation also exists to control the 
export of sensitive military and dual-use space technology, a measure 
that in part seeks to prevent proliferation of capabilities.
Military aspects
1.10. While space has been fundamental to military operations for decades, 
such is the current dependence that the vast majority of military operations 
could not be sustained without space capabilities. Operations depend on 
space, principally for communications; meteorological; positioning, navigation 
and timing functions; intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance; and the 
ability to operate remotely piloted aircraft at range. In essence, space is a vital 
part of the Defence Digital Backbone and should be seen as a vital enabling 
part of the global information network. This dependence has been identified 
as a vulnerability by adversaries19 and this has led to some nations building 
arsenals of counter-space weapons capable of degrading, denying, disrupting 
or destroying space systems. Such capabilities are discussed in later chapters 
but can have effects ranging from temporary denial to physical destruction. 
They may be surface, sub-surface, air or space based, kinetic (such as a 
DA-ASAT missile) or non-kinetic (dazzling or jamming) and may be targeted 
against any of the three segments of a space system (see paragraph 1.16).
1.11. As well as dedicated space capabilities, conventional military or 
espionage activities can have direct effects on space systems. An airstrike on a 
ground control station or a cyber payload uploaded to a satellite by a saboteur 
could have a more devastating effect on an overall space system than a 
19 For further information, see United States government, Defense Intelligence Agency, 
2022 Challenges to Security in Space: Space Reliance in an Era of Competition and 
Expansion, January 2022.
10
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

DA-ASAT targeting one specific satellite. Furthermore, direct and indirect 
attacks on objects on orbit may cause debris, which could compromise the 
attacking state’s own space capabilities. Such an overt attack may also be far 
easier to detect and attribute to a specific actor than an indirect non-kinetic 
attack. With adversaries adopting strategies designed to remain below the 
threshold that would permit a forcible response, it is increasingly likely that 
threats will be obscured. Traditional defensive procedures such as force 
protection and vetting key personnel to mitigate insider threats are therefore 
increasingly important in the space domain.20
Economic aspects
1.12. As part of an integrated approach, the UK sees a strong commercial 
space sector, allied space capabilities and civil and scientific expertise to be 
vital contributors to UK space power. To put this in context, in 2019–20, the UK 
space industry produced £16.5 billion in income and directly employed 46,995 
people with space employment growing by 6.7% from the previous year.21 
Such ambition is reflected in the 2021 Defence and Security Industrial Strategy  
20 A detailed open source discussion of current space threats can be found in the Center 
for Strategic & International Studies’ Space Threat Assessment 2021, April 2021.
21 BryceTech summary report for the UK Space Agency, Size & Health of the UK Space 
Industry 2021, 13 April 2022.
© Dima Zel / Shutterstock.com
11
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power
Direct and indirect attacks on objects on orbit may increase space debris

and the 2021 National Space Strategy. UK Defence expects to support the UK 
space sector to realise the economic benefits from this dynamic and rapidly 
expanding market, extending the UK’s influence in the space domain.
1.13. A thriving commercial space sector is valuable to Defence both for 
developing innovative projects that offer the potential of delivering decisive 
military advantage but also to reduce the costs and increase the capacity 
and availability of existing systems. The growth of commercial and dual-use 
capabilities provide options to military planners; increasingly, choices can be 
made as to which capabilities need to be owned on a sovereign basis, which 
can be obtained by collaboration with allies, and which can be accessed from 
commercial sources. The UK government has invested US $500 million in 
OneWeb, a low-Earth satellite communications company that seeks to operate 
600 satellites providing global broadband capability. Within the new Defence 
Space Portfolio, funded concept programmes exist to provide improvements 
in satellite communications, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance 
and space domain awareness. The UK has also developed a civil sovereign 
launch capability. LaunchUK, the UK Space Agency’s spaceflight programme, 
aims to establish commercial small satellite launch from the UK.22 Once this 
is established, the UK will possess an end-to-end capability able to design, 
build, launch and operate small satellites. Alongside these opportunities, it is 
important to be aware that increased space proliferation equates to increased 
challenges and potential threat vectors. While Defence is tasked to protect 
and defend space capabilities, this will come with a resource cost and detailed 
consideration must be given to how this affects commercial and dual-use 
capabilities. Furthermore, without suitable prioritisation, the pace of change will 
challenge the military in terms of maintaining relevance in a rapidly changing 
commercial space sector. 
Social aspects 
1.14. The UK, like all modern states, depends on space services for 
day-to-day societal functions such as enabling banking transactions, the 
effective operation of the national power grid and the use of smartphones. 
However, the public are often unaware of this, or take assured access for 
granted, making it difficult to acknowledge our reliance on freedom of access 
to the space environment. Culturally, space remains a unique fascination 
and the UK Space Agency is charged with inspiring the next generation, but 
space remains a subject understood by only a few, with false assumptions and 
22 UK government House of Commons Briefing Paper 2021-9202, The UK Space 
Industry, April 2021.
12
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

myths commonplace. These are increasingly perpetuated by popular culture 
and science fiction, which can distort perceptions of what can realistically be 
achieved in space while drastically underplaying the unique challenges posed 
when operating in the space environment.
Information aspects
1.15. Technological developments, including the proliferation of dual-use 
systems, have led to increasingly interconnected nodes and systems, in 
particular, in cyberspace and the information environment.23 The free flow of 
data and seamless functioning of networks are critical for space functions, 
both for control signals and the operation of payloads. Most satellites depend 
on cyber technology and this in turn opens up vulnerabilities that can be 
exploited by potential adversaries. Previously, attacking space assets was 
only an option for major powers, however, technological advances have 
lowered this cost barrier so that other actors can now procure technology 
that can affect or interfere with space operations. In addition, space 
capabilities, especially timing signals, enable the carriage and synchronisation 
of information essential for all aspects of modern society. Global navigation 
satellite systems (GNSS) especially have become ‘so prevalent today that 
they have contributed to a system-of-systems issue, such that even the 
most vigilant operators of infrastructure and other applications may not 
be completely aware of the magnitude of their reliance. Even in systems 
presumed to be independent of GNSS, master clocks and other seemingly 
independent sources of time … are in fact based on GNSS receivers and 
therefore hold an unseen dependence.’24
Infrastructure aspects
1.16. Unlike the maritime, land and air domains, space power is rarely enabled 
by human activity within the environment itself but is conducted through human 
activity on Earth. Consequently, space operations are separated into three 
segments to aid understanding of the space system as a whole.25
23 The information environment is defined as: an environment comprised of the 
information itself, the individuals, organizations and systems that receive, process and 
convey the information, and the cognitive, virtual and physical space in which this occurs.  
NATOTerm.
24 Government Office for Science, Satellite-derived Time and Position: A Study of Critical 
Dependencies , January 2018.
25 Segments are intended as a framework to aid understanding. Some capabilities or 
features of systems may overlap, for example, inter-satellite links could be considered link 
or space elements. 
13
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

a. Space segment. The space segment comprises elements of the 
space system in outer space itself, which are typically satellites on orbit 
but also other objects transiting through the space domain above the 
Kármán Line. Satellites comprise two basic systems: the spacecraft 
itself and the payloads it carries. This differentiation is important as the 
two can have different software, systems, ground segment elements 
and tasking chains.
b. Ground segment. The ground segment comprises terrestrial 
facilities that are used to launch, direct and control satellites as 
well as operate their payloads. The ground segment also includes 
infrastructure for tracking and monitoring space objects and interfaces 
to process and use satellite information. The ground segment consists 
of three distinct sub-segments: the launch and re-entry segment 
covers all aspects of launch and re-entry operations below the Kármán 
Line (above which is classified as the space segment); the control 
sub-segment consists of ground control stations and similar supporting 
infrastructure; and the user sub-segment which comprises interfaces 
such as Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers, very small aperture 
terminals and satellite telephones.
c. Link segment. The link segment connects the space and ground 
segments and comprises both the data itself and the medium used 
to carry it. Typically, this involves the use of electromagnetic signals, 
including laser communications.
Physical environment aspects
1.17. Operating in space is intrinsically dependent on the physical 
environment space provides.26 Forces that act on a satellite differ significantly 
from those which affect an aircraft in flight. Furthermore, the environment 
encountered by a spacecraft on orbit can be extremely harsh, given it lacks 
the protection afforded terrestrial domains by the Earth’s atmosphere. Such 
factors are summarised as follows.
a. Orbits and orbital mechanics. Satellites move predictably 
according to the laws of orbital mechanics. These determine the 
parameters of an orbit, including the period (the time taken for one 
complete orbit), the satellite’s speed around the orbit and its track over 
26 Further information on the physical aspects of space, including orbital mechanics, 
space debris and weather can be found in the MOD’s The UK Military Space Primer.
14
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

the Earth. The choice of orbit is a compromise between the: power 
required for data transmission against total area coverage on Earth; level 
of detail and sensitivity available; and amount of time an area is visible. A 
satellite in orbit may freely pass over any point on Earth.
b. The space environment. The space environment is extremely 
harsh and this impacts on the design of spacecraft, mission systems 
and the limitations placed on them. Typically, the environment has 
weak aerodynamic forces. While drag still occurs, the laws of orbital 
motion dominate, making changes to the orbit largely propulsion based. 
Manoeuvring takes considerable planning and incurs fuel penalties 
which, unlike aircraft, currently cannot be commonly replenished in 
flight. Space also exhibits extremely high temperature fluctuations as a 
satellite passes in and out of the view of the sun. These variations, even 
those between the sun facing and shaded surfaces of a satellite itself, 
can be extremely damaging to the satellite and its sensors. Significant 
amounts of a satellite’s structure need to be dedicated to thermal control 
subsystems, rather than forming part of the payload. Operating in a high 
vacuum also causes significant challenges for satellite design as the 
vacuum can cause lubricants to evaporate, metals to weld themselves 
together and plastics to be completely eroded. Furthermore, high levels 
of radiation, highly energetic particles and fluctuating magnetic fields can 
severely impact space capabilities.
c. Space debris. There are tens of thousands of objects in orbit larger 
than 10 centimetres, most of which are items of space debris. The total 
amount of debris, most of which is too small to be detected, is estimated 
to be greater than one hundred million objects. Given the speed 
that these objects travel, they pose a significant hazard to operating 
in the space domain and their numbers are constantly increasing. 
Removing debris is technically possible but it is complicated by cost, 
legal issues and political challenges. An effort by one state to remove 
a non-functioning object owned by another could be interpreted as a 
hostile act, raise wider security concerns and complicate international 
liability considerations. Likewise, an object designed to remove debris 
could equally be used to damage or destroy a functioning satellite. 
Space debris continues to be a significant issue, hence the requirement 
for capabilities to track and monitor such hazards and risks.
15
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

d. Space weather. The sun’s activity causes space weather through 
events such as solar flares, coronal mass ejections and radiation 
storms.27 Space weather can adversely affect space segment 
capabilities by disrupting satellite sensors, degrading electronic circuits, 
corrupting computer memory and by causing damage to solar panels. 
Enhanced radiation levels also heat the atmosphere, subjecting satellites 
in LEO to enhanced drag, which shortens their lifetime. Space weather 
can affect the link segment, since solar storms have the capacity to 
disrupt communication and navigation system frequencies.28 It can also 
create effects on Earth, causing damage to electrical systems such 
as power grids, pipelines and signalling equipment. Space weather 
can therefore have a significant impact on a host of military and civilian 
applications, especially satellite communications and precise navigation. 
Users of systems that have a dependency on space need to be 
cognisant of the dynamic space environment and satellites need to be 
resilient enough to operate effectively in such an environment.
27 See the MOD’s The UK Military Space Primer  for more details.
28 Including secure satellite communications and positioning, navigation and timing data, 
derived from GPS.
© Color4260 / Shutterstock.com
16
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power
Space weather can have a significant impact on a host of military and civilian applications

The Carrington Event
The Carrington Event, named after the astronomer who observed and 
recorded it, was a severe space weather event that occurred between 2nd 
and 3rd September 1859. It remains the largest solar storm on record. One, 
possibly two, coronal mass ejections erupted from the surface of the sun, 
causing the Earth to be hit by a vast eruption of magnetised plasma moving 
at around 1900 kilometres/second. The orientation of the wave was opposite 
to that of the Earth’s interplanetary magnetic field, causing the Earth’s 
magnetosphere to be effectively opened up, allowing the solar plasma in. 
Upon impact, the event generated ground induced electric currents that 
caused telegraph systems to fail and, in some cases, cause electric shocks 
and sparks that went on to cause fires. Such an event may be rare but is 
almost inevitable in the future: a Carrington-class storm narrowly missed 
the Earth in 2012. Studies have shown that an event today would have 
more significant consequences given modern reliance on technology. A 
reasonable worst case scenario could see severe damage to the electricity 
grid, satellites, electrical systems, navigation systems and communications 
systems on Earth.29 The total economic cost of a similar event to the US  
alone was estimated by the insurers Lloyds to be between US $0.6–2.6 trillion 
at 2013 prices.30
Time
1.18. While satellites are capable of accessing any area on the planet, for any 
other than GEO, limitations traditionally existed in terms of persistence, given 
the revisit times required for an individual satellite to sense a given area of 
interest. More recently, the proliferation and exponential growth, especially of 
satellites in LEO, has potentially removed this limitation, albeit universal satellite 
coverage does not currently equate to universal coverage of all missions and 
sensors. Time does still have direct relevance to the space domain: solar 
weather activity varies according to an 11-year cycle. The last solar minimum 
was in late 2019 with the next solar maximum forecast to arrive between 
2025 and 2026. The current growth in numbers of satellites being launched 
will be paralleled by an increase in solar activity that is likely to affect them. 
Finally, unlike aircraft, there is currently no commonly fielded ability to refuel 
29 Royal Academy of Engineering, Extreme space weather: impacts on engineered 
systems and infrastructure, February 2013.
30 Lloyd’s, Solar Storm Risk to the North American Electric Grid , 2013.
17
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

satellites on orbit,31 thus every satellite launched has a finite operational lifetime 
based on the fuel it carries and which it needs to operate its systems and 
manoeuvre to maintain the orbit parameters it is launched on. Increasingly 
smaller, cheaper satellites are designed to only have short lifetimes, re-entering 
the Earth’s atmosphere at the end of their lifetime so as to burn up and 
minimise space debris. These ‘disposable satellites’ can then be replaced by 
modernised versions equipped with more modern technology. Larger exquisite 
satellites are designed to be operated for much longer periods of time, but 
their fuel resources are still finite: any manoeuvres to reorientate, stabilise or 
mitigate threats reduces their potential operating lifetime.
Section 3 – Characteristics and 
limitations of space power
1.19. Space power has distinctive attributes brought about by the 
characteristics of the environment. These are perspective, access, persistence 
and versatility, and they are explained below.
a. Perspective. As with the air domain, space capabilities exploit the 
vertical dimension, albeit to a completely different order of magnitude. 
Such an unparalleled vantage point means that space represents the 
ultimate high ground. Even satellites stationed in the lowest orbits offer 
a footprint that can cover thousands of square miles of the Earth’s 
surface. Those positioned in the higher orbits can have a perspective 
covering approximately one third of the Earth.
b. Access. The international rules and norms governing overflight 
of sovereign states by aircraft do not apply to satellites; space offers 
unrivalled access to any point on Earth, with no requirement to adhere 
to national boundaries. This provides significant military utility, as 
satellites can overcome the difficulties of gaining access to an area of 
operations, be it due to overflight permission or adversarial anti-access 
and area denial strategies.32
31 Although considerable research activity is focusing on this area.
32 Satellites are not impervious to anti-access and area denial threats, as demonstrated 
by successful anti-satellite missile tests by China and India. However, the perceived 
constraints on satellite operations are very much reduced compared to air operations.
18
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

c. Persistence. Typically, the orbital life expectancy of satellites is 
measured in years or even decades, so they can overcome the air 
power limitation of impermanence. A GEO allows a satellite to remain 
over the same area of the Earth 24 hours a day, providing continuous 
access to a given terrestrial area of interest. Satellites in LEO can also 
provide significant persistence if sufficient coverage is provided by a 
constellation of satellites. However, the higher GEO does not currently 
afford high-resolution images of Earth and individual satellites in LEO 
can only provide intermittent coverage.
d. Versatility. Space assets are versatile because a single platform 
can carry a multitude of sensors and capabilities to provide services 
simultaneously to multiple users. While the MOD has a capability 
programme to deliver sovereign capability, many UK space 
programmes are still combined civil-military enterprises, with broad 
applicability across a range of government policy functions.
1.20. Limitations of space power. While providing tangible benefits to 
Defence, using space power is not without its challenges. The following 
limitations should also be considered when discussing the space domain.
a. Cost. While the traditional cost barriers for space systems have 
dramatically reduced, they are still expensive. Furthermore, while 
it is increasingly cheap to launch small satellites into LEO, these 
are not always suited to all military tasks and capabilities. Larger 
multi-payload satellites capable of being launched into GEO and which 
are designed to remain in orbit for greater periods of time can still be 
vastly expensive undertakings, especially as these systems need to 
be hardened to cope with both the hazards posed by harsh operating 
environments and threats from adversaries. Such increased resilience 
comes at a cost, both in terms of the satellites themselves but also 
their larger launch platforms. A balance must be struck between these 
large, exquisite capabilities and smaller, cheaper systems that may be 
able to mitigate some of their disadvantages through sheer numbers 
and which can be rapidly replaced with newer more modern systems 
as technology advances. Regardless, a distinction must also be made 
between what may be termed financial cost against conceptual cost. 
The financial cost of a sovereign space system might be vast but the 
conceptual cost of not having it, or relying on others for it, might mean 
we are unable to operate across all other operational domains or at 
least are subject to leverage from a competitor.
19
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

b. Vulnerability. Space systems possess vulnerabilities across all 
three segments. Objects such as satellites in the space segment are 
subject to the harsh conditions found in the space environment as well 
as from direct threats. The link segment is particularly vulnerable given 
that weak signals from space will often be vulnerable to more powerful 
and closer surface-based electromagnetic warfare weapons such as 
jammers. Ground segment infrastructure may also not be as heavily 
protected as other military sites, thereby making them vulnerable 
to a raft of full spectrum attacks. Force protection of critical ground 
segment sites will be increasingly important in an era of constant 
competition with adversaries trying to mask their activities given how 
obvious, and therefore attributable, direct attacks on space-based or 
link systems can be.
c. Predictability. Objects in space do not fly like aircraft, rather they 
fall in accordance with the laws of orbital mechanics. Satellite orbits 
are therefore mostly predictable.33 From an adversary’s point of view, 
it is possible to accurately predict where a satellite will be at a given 
time. That said, just because it is possible to know where something is 
does not mean one knows exactly what it is doing and, thus, not only 
the tracking, but also the identification and characterisation of space 
objects is crucial.
d. Limited responsiveness. While limited responsiveness is still 
valid when considering larger exquisite capabilities (which are few in 
number and take years and sometimes decades to build and replace), 
increasingly, the ease with which small, almost disposable satellites 
can be built and launched may mitigate this limitation to some degree. 
A state with an end-to-end space capability could possess a stock 
of ‘plug and play’ small satellites, at suitable readiness levels, to be 
launched using sovereign capabilities very rapidly indeed. Using these 
procedures, space could certainly be responsive enough for most 
operational scenarios.
e. Orbit congestion. While space itself is vast, the laws of orbital 
mechanics mean that certain orbits, especially GEO, are extremely 
valuable. Orbit slots in GEO are regulated by the ITU. Any actor wanting 
to launch a satellite into GEO must apply to the ITU for a slot and 
popular regions have become so congested that few or no orbital slots 
33 Exceptions such as the Russian LUCH, Chinese SJ17 and US X37B can manoeuvre in 
space.
20
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

remain. Issues surrounding the filing of orbital slots and the allocations 
themselves are being examined, not least due to commercial pressures 
and allegations of ‘paper satellites’ where an actor submits an 
application for a satellite that does not exist or may not be built for a 
considerable time. This in effect captures the slot for the actor’s future 
use but denies it to others. Capturing such prime space ‘real estate’ 
may present risks or limitations to an individual actor’s future strategic 
ambitions in space. 
Section 4 – Space power in context
The national context
1.21. National Space Strategy. Echoing the 2021 Integrated Review and 
Defence in a competitive age (Defence Command Paper),34 the first National 
Space Strategy set the goal for the UK to become a meaningful actor in the 
space domain by 2030. The National Space Strategy brings together civil 
and defence activity in an integrated approach to deliver and maintain an 
end-to-end sovereign capability that can develop, build, launch and operate 
space systems. As well as providing military advantage, space is seen as a 
critical area that can promote growth in the UK economy, provide opportunities 
to expand the UK’s technical and research sectors, and create and maintain 
a skilled workforce. Underpinning this is the need for the UK, and UK Defence 
in particular, to be able to protect and defend the UK’s national interests in 
space. The National Space Strategy is supported by a coherent MOD-specific 
Defence Space Strategy.35
1.22. Defence Space Strategy. The 2022 Defence Space Strategy sets 
out how Defence will support national efforts to become a meaningful actor 
in space as well as securing UK interests and ensuring freedom of action 
throughout all five operational domains. It sets out how Defence will deliver 
the protect and defend functions of the National Space Strategy as well as 
supporting the objectives of the Integrated Review. It also outlines the Defence 
Space Portfolio of investment into military and dual-use space capabilities as 
well as clarifying the space organisational hierarchy shown in Figure 1.1.
34 MOD, Defence in a competitive age , March 2021.
35 MOD, Defence Space Strategy: Operationalising the Space Domain , February 2022.
21
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

Figure 1.1 – UK strategic space hierarchy and core outputs36
1.23. National Space Council. To integrate space policy across government 
departments, a new Cabinet committee, the National Space Council, 
was established in 2020 with the aim of setting the strategic direction for 
and overseeing the UK government’s space activities in line with the UK 
government’s ambition. Particularly close ties are required between the 
Space Directorates within the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy (BEIS) and the MOD to deliver on the 2021 National Space Strategy.
1.24. Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. BEIS is 
the central department coordinating responsibility for civil space policy. It is 
also the sponsoring department of the UK Space Agency and UK Research 
and Innovation, which are key agencies for the delivery of the National Space 
Strategy. Through its arms-length bodies, it uses satellite-enabled capabilities 
to monitor land use, deliver accurate weather forecasting and coordinate 
resilience to space weather.
1.25. UK Space Agency. The UK Space Agency develops and delivers UK 
civil space programmes, based on its deep competence in space science 
and technology and its partnerships within government, across the UK sector 
and with international space institutions. It enables delivery of national space 
36 MOD, Defence Space Strategy: Operationalising the Space Domain , February 2022.
Space policy, Defence 
space strategy and
cross-domain integration
National
Space
Strategy
Capability management,
force generation, force
training and space operations
Strategic
Command
Other
government
departments
National
Space
Council
Air
Command
UK Space
Command
MOD Space
Directorate
UK Space
Agency
BEIS Space
Directorate
BEIS Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
MOD Ministry of Defence
22
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

capabilities, invests in early-stage research and development and helps to 
represent the UK in international civil space cooperation. 
1.26. MOD Space Directorate. UK military space policy and strategy is 
the responsibility of the Space Directorate in the MOD. Further information is 
provided in Chapter 3.
1.27 . UK Space Command. Established in 2021 at Royal Air Force (RAF) 
High Wycombe, UK Space Command brings together the three key areas 
of military space activity37 under a single 2* military commander. Further 
information is provided in Chapter 3. 
The global context
1.28. Since all states share access to and use of the space domain, and face 
common hazards and challenges, space is uniquely positioned to encourage 
cooperation. A broad multinational and multi-agency collaboration, including 
allies, international organisations and non-governmental organisations, 
can provide a range of services that most nations could not generate 
independently. Working together with international partners in the space 
domain also helps solidify collaboration in wider security matters.
The UK is leading the global discussion on what responsible 
behaviour in space looks like. We believe a new approach is 
urgently needed to increase trust and confidence between 
countries operating in space to prevent an arms race or a 
conflict that could have catastrophic consequences.
The Rt Hon Dominic Raab MP, then Foreign Secretary38
1.29. The United Nations. The UK is attempting to broker an international 
consensus on responsible behaviour in space through the UN. The UK 
introduced a UN resolution which was adopted by the UN General Assembly 
in December 2020.39 The resolution called on member states to consider how 
a behaviour-based approach could help reduce threats to space systems 
37 Space operations; space workforce training and growth; and space capability.
38 UK government press release, ‘ UK push for landmark UN resolution to agree 
responsible behaviour in space ’, 26 August 2020.
39 UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/75/36, Reducing space threats through 
norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviours , 16 December 2020.
23
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power
“

and prevent an arms race in outer space. It emphasises the importance of 
maintaining outer space as a peaceful, safe, stable, secure and sustainable 
environment for the benefit of all and urges states ‘to refrain from conducting 
activities contrary to their obligations under international law, including those 
that could threaten the ability of all States to freely use and explore outer 
space, now and in the future’.40
1.30. European Space Agency. While the UK left the European Union in 
2020, its membership of ESA was not affected as ESA is not a European 
Union organisation. The UK did lose access to the Galileo GNSS programme, 
but the UK remains part of ESA and is committed to a number of ESA 
programmes, most notably the Copernicus Earth observation programme, 
the solar orbiter programme and other programmes designed to increase 
understanding of space weather.
1.31. North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The Integrated Review stated that 
the UK has an unwavering commitment to NATO and remains bound to the 
requirement for collective self-defence under Article 5 of the North Atlantic 
Treaty.41 Accordingly, NATO remains the UK’s foremost defensive alliance and 
is pivotal to the UK’s deterrence strategy. At the 2021 Brussels Summit, NATO 
recognised that attacks to, from or within space present a clear challenge 
to the security of the Alliance and could lead to the invocation of Article 5 of 
the North Atlantic Treaty. NATO formally declared space to be an operational 
domain in December 2019 and the Military Committee approved a Space 
Domain Action Plan in April 2021. A NATO Space Centre was established at 
Ramstein in 2020 and plans are at an advanced stage to establish a NATO 
Space Centre of Excellence in Toulouse, France by 2025. The establishment of 
space as an official operational domain will require revision of NATO doctrine 
and standards but plans to put this into practice are still being developed in 
line with the action plan and will be supported by the new NATO Space Centre 
of Excellence. UK doctrine policy is to adopt NATO doctrine where possible 
and therefore the UK will proactively seek to influence the emerging NATO 
space doctrine.
40 UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/75/36, Reducing space threats through 
norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviours , 16 December 2020.
41 That an attack on one NATO Ally shall be considered an attack on all.
24
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

1.32. United States. As our pre-eminent national security partner, 
cooperation with the US is exceptionally close and the relationship is critical to 
assure access to a host of space services. The UK was the first nation to join 
the US-led Operation Olympic Defender. Conversely, the UK operates a limited 
number of space capabilities which bring mutual benefit to this relationship, 
not least by providing highly trained UK military space experts both integrated 
in and directly supporting US space capabilities.
Operation Olympic Defender
The UK was the first nation to join the US-led multinational Operation 
Olympic Defender. Participating countries are maximising the benefit 
provided from space and space systems through cooperation across all 
space missions, preserving the safety of operating in space while enhancing 
mutual national security. These operations involve partners sharing 
information and resources as well as coordinating their capabilities. The UK’s 
role is to analyse and share information about space to ensure troops on the 
ground are aware of threats and their options to maintain access to space 
services.42
1.33. The Combined Space Operations initiative. The Combined Space 
Operations initiative is a partnership of seven nations43 working together 
to address threats and shared interests in space. By building on existing 
alliances, the Combined Space Operations initiative is viewed as a potential 
route to developing systems that meet the needs of several countries who face 
similar threats and challenges.44
42 As articulated in the National Space Strategy.
43 The US, UK, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, France and Germany.
44 House of Commons Library Research Briefing, The militarisation of space, 14 June 2021.
25
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

Key points
• Space is strategically and economically important to the UK.
• For the purposes of this document, space is viewed as being above the 
Kármán Line (around 100 kilometres above sea level).
• The space domain is congested by the exponential increase of objects 
in orbit and made complex by blurred ownership and challenges 
ascertaining the true function of satellites.
• Space is critical for both military and civilian purposes and is increasingly 
contested given the return to systemic competition between states.
• Space power provides a commander with distinctive advantages, namely: 
perspective, access, persistence and versatility.
• These advantages may be offset by limitations such as cost, vulnerability, 
predictability, a relative lack of responsiveness and congestion on key 
orbits.
• Space operations can be split into three overlapping segments: ground 
(launchers, control stations and interfaces), space (objects in or transiting 
through space) and link (the data and mediums used to connect them).
• Space operations face both threats (human-derived) and hazards 
(environmental factors) across all three segments.
26
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

Notes
27
JDP 0-40
1
An introduction to space power

[Page 40: No extractable text]

The UK considers there to be four key space power roles: 
space domain awareness, space control, space support to 
operations and space service support. These are introduced 
in Chapter 2 along with the key missions that sit under them.
Section 1 – Space domain awareness. . . . . . . . . 31
Section 2 – Space control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Section 3 – Space support to operations  . . . . . . . 40
Section 4 – Space service support  . . . . . . . . . . 49
© Lawrence Cruciana / Shutterstock.com
29
JDP 0-40
Chapter 2

A comprehensive understanding 
of activity in the space domain and 
an ability to protect, defend and 
integrate, as we have for the other 
domains, will be crucial in enabling 
our Armed Forces to respond to 
future global challenges. 
 
UK Defence Space Strategy,  
February 2022 
”
“
30
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Chapter 2
The roles of space power
Section 1 – Space domain awareness
2.1. Understanding of the congested, complex, critical and contested space 
domain is achieved through space surveillance and tracking (SST) and space 
situational awareness (SSA). Together these feed into the overarching military 
space power role of space domain awareness (SDA).45
2.2. Space surveillance and tracking. Space surveillance and tracking 
is defined as: the detection, tracking and identification of objects in or 
entering the space domain, using data from sensor observations and satellite 
operators, sufficient to deliver effective space situational awareness, space 
domain awareness and missile warning. Note: space surveillance and 
tracking is delivered for both civil and military purposes.  SST includes sensor 
tasking and management, orbit determination and propagation, catalogue 
maintenance, launch and manoeuvre detection amongst other tasks.
2.3. Space situational awareness. Space situational awareness is defined 
as: the provision of sufficient understanding of the risks and hazards 
associated with domain congestion and complexity to enable safe and 
effective space operations. Note: space situational awareness supports 
both civil and military purposes. SSA includes SST-dependent tasks such 
as conjunction analysis, fragmentation analysis and re-entry warning for civil 
contingency purposes. It also includes launch collision avoidance, laser range 
clearance, space weather warnings, frequency deconfliction and orbital slot 
station-keeping monitoring for regulatory purposes and treaty compliance, 
amongst many other tasks. SSA therefore forms the foundational knowledge 
upon which successful space operations relies.
2.4. Space domain awareness. Space domain awareness is defined as: 
the provision of security-focused, decision-quality information that can be 
used to successfully mitigate adversary space effects while supporting the 
integration of allied space effects into multi-domain operations. Note: space 
domain awareness is derived from the fusion and aggregation of broader 
45 Definitions of SDA, SST and SSA outlined in this section are new UK definitions and will 
be included in the next edition of Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1, UK Terminology 
Supplement to NATOTerm.
31
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

intelligence and knowledge of the terrestrial domains with space situational 
awareness and space surveillance and tracking data. SDA includes tasks 
such as attack attribution, characterisation, jamming analysis, capability and 
behavioural analysis, and threat modelling. Missile warning also has a critical 
dependency on sound SDA. SDA builds on SSA to address the threat to 
UK and allied interests in an increasingly contested domain. It relies on the 
detection, tracking and identification provided by SST, delivering an increased 
understanding of the space domain and threats to our critical space systems 
and services. Knowledge is required of space system ground, link and space 
segments and the threats to each, both terrestrial and space-based. 
2.5. Military and civil connotations. It should be noted that the term SDA, 
being specifically threat focused, has more military connotations than SSA and, 
accordingly, SSA may still be used by allies, partners across government and 
industry. An awareness of the differences between SDA and SSA is therefore 
essential under the integrated approach. In simple terms, SDA provides the 
‘so what’ for military commanders and may form part of critical commanders 
intelligence requirements,46 while SSA provides the underpinning understanding 
necessary to conduct operations in space. Figure 2.1 illustrates the relationships 
between the different roles required to understand the space domain.
Figure 2.1 – The relationships between space surveillance and tracking, 
space situational awareness and space domain awareness 
46 Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-2, Allied Joint Doctrine for Intelligence, 
Counter-intelligence and Security , Edition B Version 1, July 2020.
Space surveillance
and tracking
Space domain
awareness
Civilian space
situational awareness
Information ﬂow (most of the time)
Classiﬁcation
Military space
situational awareness
32
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Challenges to space domain awareness
2.6. Detection. Detection of space objects can be challenging. In low 
Earth orbits (LEOs), this is typically done by active radar, such as that at 
Royal Air Force (RAF) Fylingdales. For higher orbits, the power needed to 
generate a radar beam to the range and fidelity required is often unfeasible, 
therefore satellites on these orbits are currently identified and tracked by 
optical telescopes or other sensors using other areas of the electromagnetic 
spectrum.47 Depending on the orbits concerned, sensors may only have 
fleeting windows in which to detect and track a space object before it passes 
out of sensor coverage. For this reason, multiple sensors placed in different 
geographical locations can increase the area of coverage and the UK’s 
network of overseas bases and dependencies make it potentially well placed. 
Furthermore, effective coverage can be increased by sharing information with 
like-minded allies. Regardless, once the orbit of an object is ascertained, the 
laws of orbital mechanics can be used to predict the track of an object without 
necessarily needing to maintain continuity of tracking. However, this can be 
challenging if an object changes its orbit profile, requiring it to be reacquired 
and correlated with the existing catalogue of space objects.
2.7. Warning and assessment. The ability to predict and differentiate 
between potential or actual hazards and threats can be challenging but in 
doing so we seek to protect ourselves while also seeking to identify actors 
and their activities. For instance, to mitigate the risk of collision, data from 
terrestrial sensors is used to predict potential impacts and subsequently 
provide warnings to satellite operators about the hazards posed by other 
satellites and/or space debris.48 Such activities are increasingly challenged 
by the exponential rise in numbers of satellites in orbit combined with the 
presence of more and more space debris, particularly in LEO. The UK Space 
Operations Centre (UK SpOC) at RAF High Wycombe49 provides the UK 
warning and assessment capability, in coordination with RAF Fylingdales and 
other government agencies and industry partners, such as the Met Office 
Space Weather Operations Centre for space weather hazards.50
47 Although the planned United States (US) Deep Space Advanced Radar Capability may 
address some of these issues.
48 The prediction of potential collisions is referred to as conjunction analysis. For more 
details, see the Ministry of Defence’s (MOD’s) The UK Military Space Primer.
49 In consultation with the US Combined Space Operations Centre.
50 Operational since October 2014, the Met Office operates a fully staffed Space Weather 
Operations Centre, which issues space weather forecasts, alerts, warnings and advice 
24 hours a day.
33
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

2.8. Characterisation. While space objects can be detected, tracked and 
identified, in the current complex and congested space environment where 
adversaries attempt to hide the true nature of their activities, an equally 
important challenge is to characterise space objects to understand their true 
purpose. This deeper analysis is pivotal for SDA over and above SSA. Once an 
object is characterised as a satellite, it is important to determine its capabilities 
and intent, including detailed characteristics and operating parameters. This 
process is made more challenging by the exponential increase of numbers 
of objects in orbit with multiple payloads often being launched from a 
single launcher. Furthermore, dual-use technology is now commonplace; 
seemingly innocent satellites may also have military roles, which can provide 
opportunities but may also present legal challenges for commanders who 
may wish to apply effects against such a platform operated by an adversary. 
As well as threats, it is also important to characterise hazards such as 
space weather events and predict their anticipated effects. This provides 
decision-makers with the knowledge and confidence to make assessments on 
how their operations may be affected and any mitigation they may attempt.
Section 2 – Space control
2.9. Space control is defined as: the use of defensive and offensive 
capabilities to assure access and freedom of action in space.51 As well as 
assuring our own access to the domain, this can, when directed, also involve 
countering an adversary’s efforts to defeat, interfere with or attack UK or allied 
space systems and even target an adversary’s own space systems to gain 
military advantage. While traditionally viewed as a purely military undertaking, 
in an era of persistent competition, the integrated approach means that 
achieving a desired degree of space control can also be pursued through 
diplomatic, regulatory or legal channels. For example, the UK-sponsored 
United Nations (UN) resolution on reducing space threats notes the ‘need 
for all States to work together to reduce threats to space systems through 
the further development and implementation of norms, rules and principles 
of responsible behaviours’.52 Such diplomatic and potentially legal efforts 
to reduce space threats contribute to our freedom of action and therefore 
can be considered an element of an integrated space control strategy. 
Notwithstanding these efforts, the Defence Space Strategy recognises that 
51 This is a new definition that will be included in the next edition of JDP 0-01.1, UK 
Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
52 UN General Assembly Resolution A/RES/75/36, Reducing space threats through 
norms, rules and principles of responsible behaviours , 16 December 2020.
34
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

‘in response to our adversaries’ increasing offensive capabilities in space, 
we require credible deterrence and response options to protect and defend 
our national interests in and through space. This includes a coherent and 
responsive intelligence-focussed strategy, effective operational space control 
capability and resilient on-orbit, terrestrial and cyber infrastructure’.53 In addition 
to sovereign capability, pledged to be developed under the Defence Space 
Strategy via the Defence Space Portfolio, it also recognises the need for 
credibility to be enhanced by our behaviour along with our relations with our 
allies, partners across government and industry under the integrated approach.
2.10. The nature of the space environment is such that total control (as the 
term is understood in the other operational domains) may not be feasible for 
any single actor or even alliance. Total space dominance may also be outside 
a given international mandate, however, given the scale and scope of the 
environment it may not be necessary, rather it would be sufficient to achieve 
a degree of control necessary to assure freedom of action in space. Space 
control is split into two key components: offensive space control (OSC) and 
defensive space control (DSC), as illustrated in Figure 2.2. It should be noted 
that the differentiation between OSC and DSC can be blurred. Activity directed 
against a weapon system targeting a friendly satellite could be considered 
DSC, but the same activity directed against an adversary high value asset for 
broader military outcomes could be considered OSC. 
Figure 2.2 – The components of space control
53 MOD, Defence Space Strategy: Operationalising the Space Domain , February 2022.
Offensive
space control
Ground
segment
attack
Link
segment
attack
Passive
measures
Active
measures
Space
segment
attack
Defensive
space control
Space control
35
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Offensive space control
2.11. OSC operations seek to disrupt, degrade, deny or destroy the 
space-related capabilities and forces of an adversary. Such operations can 
be targeted against any of the segments of space activities using kinetic or 
non-kinetic techniques but need to be carefully considered given the unique 
legal and ethical complications of deliberately targeting interconnected space 
systems, especially where dual-use capabilities may be involved.54 OSC can be 
subdivided as follows.
2.12. Space segment attack. A space segment attack consists of systems 
and activities used to disrupt, degrade, deny or destroy a satellite in orbit. It can 
be further divided as follows.
a. Direct ascent anti-satellite (DA-ASAT) weapons can be launched 
from the maritime, land or air domains to hit a satellite either directly 
or with shrapnel. A number of allies and potential adversaries have 
demonstrated this capability, but it should be noted that such an activity 
can be readily attributable and will also create a debris cloud that may 
affect their own space systems as well as draw condemnation and 
potentially responses from other actors reliant on the space domain.55
Other direct ascent anti-satellite tests
In September 1985, the United States (US) Air Force successfully test-fired an 
anti-satellite missile from an F-15 Eagle aircraft, from Edwards Air Force Base, 
California. The missile successfully destroyed a US satellite orbiting 340 miles 
overhead. In addition, in February 2008, under Operation Burnt Frost, the US 
intercepted and destroyed a non-functioning US satellite deemed a hazard on 
re-entry using a heavily modified Standard Missile 3 fired from USS Lake Erie.
On 27 March 2019, India conducted ‘Mission Shakti’. A modified anti-ballistic 
missile interceptor known as the Prithvi Defence Vehicle Mark-II was launched 
against a test satellite in LEO, destroying it. In this instance, the test was 
conducted at a relatively low altitude intended to reduce the resulting debris 
field but ably demonstrated that India now possessed a functional DA-ASAT 
capability.
54 See Joint Service Publication 900, UK Full Spectrum Targeting Policy, Edition 5, Part 2, 
Annex G, ‘Space Control Operations’ for specific guidance at the OFFICIAL -SENSITIVE 
classification.
55 The US, Russia, India and China have all demonstrated that they have the ability to 
conduct direct ascent attacks on satellites.
36
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

b. Non-kinetic means of space segment activity can include 
laser-dazzle attack, cyber effects and electromagnetic warfare 
techniques. Lasers can be used to temporarily dazzle or permanently 
blind the sensors on a satellite. They can also cause components 
to overheat. Other techniques, such as the use of high powered 
microwave transmitters, can cause permanent damage to a satellite’s 
electronics without necessarily causing the debris field of a DA-ASAT 
engagement.56
c. Co-orbital systems may be grouped into rendezvous operations 
and proximity operations. While these are often grouped together, they 
are distinct activities. A rendezvous operation involves attaching one 
satellite to another. This could pose a threat as the intercepting satellite 
could potentially be used to manipulate, damage or even destroy its 
target.57 Proximity operations involve stationing one satellite close to 
another for a time. While this could be a direct threat, for example, if 
the intercepting satellite possessed a warhead or powerful jamming 
device, proximity operations can also be used to conduct a detailed 
assessment of the capabilities of a satellite to characterise it or to seek 
to intercept or manipulate signals as part of a link segment attack. 
More simply, such a satellite may just be positioned to block line of 
sight to a target area or control signal source.
d. Nuclear attack. While prohibited,58 the detonation of a high 
altitude or exo-atmospheric nuclear device can create a high radiation 
environment and an electromagnetic pulse (EMP) that would have 
large-scale indiscriminate effects on satellites in affected orbits. Such 
an event would immediately affect satellites within range of its EMP and 
would also create a high radiation environment that would accelerate 
the longer term degradation of satellite components on unshielded 
satellites in affected orbital regimes.59
56 While less likely, it should be noted that any attack on a satellite which does not remove 
the satellite from the space domain could directly or indirectly lead to the break-up or 
collision of that satellite, leading to an equivalent debris field.
57 Challenges from space debris have led to the development of debris removal 
technologies, however, these could be considered dual-use technologies given an 
adversary could develop an OSC capability able to ‘capture’ target satellites under the 
cover of a debris mitigation programme.
58 The detonation of nuclear weapons in space is banned under the Partial Test Ban 
Treaty of 1963. Notably, the UK, US and Russia are signatories but China and North Korea 
are not.
59 Center for Strategic & International Studies, Space Threat Assessment 2021, April 2021.
37
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Co-orbital anti-satellite tests
The US accused Russia of conducting a co-orbital anti-satellite test in 
July 2020. This test involved a Russian satellite (Cosmos 2542) that contained 
a smaller satellite inside of it, labelled Cosmos 2543. Cosmos 2542 ejected 
Cosmos 2543 in 2019. On 15 July 2020, Cosmos 2543 fired a small 
projectile near an unrelated Russian satellite. US Space Command released 
a statement that condemned this test and asserted that the small projectile 
fired from Cosmos 2543 could be used to target satellites. In response, the 
Russian Ministry of Defence said these ‘matryoshka’, or nesting, satellites 
are deployed for routine inspections and surveillance of Russia’s own space 
assets. Since being ejected from its mother satellite, Cosmos 2543 has 
been very active, conducting proximity operations with several other Russian 
satellites.60
2.13. Ground segment attack. A ground segment attack is a practical option 
for OSC operations because it can be delivered through a kinetic attack on a 
terrestrial space node, for example, using a combat air platform, cruise missile 
or special forces. Alternatively, non-kinetic means, such as electromagnetic 
warfare or cyberattacks, could be used. Ground segments are also vulnerable 
to insider threats if force protection and vetting activities are not rigorous. Such 
methods avoid the advanced technological requirements and costs associated 
with a kinetic attack on the space segment, as well as potentially reducing the 
risk of generating unwanted space debris.
2.14. Link segment attacks. Link segment attacks target a satellite’s control 
systems, mission systems or data transmissions by targeting the link itself 
or its terrestrial control or receive nodes via non-kinetic means such as 
electromagnetic warfare or cyber capabilities. Electronic attack can use either 
space- or land-based jamming or spoofing techniques to target a satellite 
through signal interference. Cyber capabilities can use the link segment to 
target satellite control systems, potentially allowing an adversary to take control 
and either disable or manipulate the satellite to their advantage, such as 
shifting the focus of the sensors to another area. Conversely, the link segment 
can also be used as a vector to target ground segment infrastructure, for 
example, using space-enabled cyber operations. More passive means may 
involve attempting to capture and either exploit the link data as part of an 
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) collect or manipulate and 
retransmit it to attempt to deceive an adversary.
60 Center for Strategic & International Studies, Space Threat Assessment 2021, April 2021.
38
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Defensive space control
2.15. DSC requires a proactive approach but can be both proactive 
and reactive in nature. It is conducted to protect space capabilities from 
attack, interference or unintentional hazards. Various methods can be 
used to maximise the resilience of space capabilities to disruption from 
malicious activity or hazards such as space weather. Foreign counter-space 
programmes are becoming increasingly capable, so defensive capabilities 
must continue to be developed to assure freedom of action. DSC consists of 
both passive and active measures.
a. Passive measures provide a significant level of protection by 
physically hardening satellites to enable resistance to radiation or 
electronic attack. Anti-jamming and cryptographic techniques can be 
used to protect command, telemetry and data transmission links. The 
protection of terrestrial infrastructure is another important aspect and can 
be achieved by ensuring that adequate force protection is in place or by 
using camouflage, concealment and deception techniques. Additionally, 
strong operations security measures are critical to mitigate the current 
inability to upgrade or retrofit capabilities within the space segment.
b. Active measures include using techniques to counter any kinetic or 
non-kinetic attacks against a satellite or its mission systems. Examples 
include manoeuvring a satellite to avoid a co-orbital threat or hazard, 
reorientating a sensor to avoid a jammer/laser or reducing sensitivity/
shutting down a receiver to protect against jamming. All of these 
activities could result in a temporary mission kill and even a reduction 
in life of the satellite or mission but may maximise longer-term survival. 
Additionally, active measures may be used to target adversary threats 
and prevent them from deploying attacks against space systems.
Challenges to space control
2.16. Satellites typically follow predictable orbits, are difficult to conceal and 
have a limited ability to manoeuvre away from threats and hazards. This makes 
them vulnerable to adversaries who have the ability to track and subsequently 
target them using OSC techniques such as laser dazzling or, in extremis, a 
kinetic attack.61 Using alternative surface properties, which reduce a satellite’s 
signature, can complicate efforts to observe and track satellites, noting such 
61 Conversely, the orbit of adversary satellites can also be predicted, enabling the conduct 
of OSC activities or the concealment of sensitive operations or capabilities on Earth.
39
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

materials must still be able to function in the space environment. Satellites are 
also highly dependent on the link segment for control and data transmission, 
so adequate frequency selection, encryption and anti-jamming capabilities 
must be used to reduce the chance of them being exploited. However, these 
measures do come at a cost and some commercial or dual-use capabilities 
may not have been designed to possess robust security features. Commercial 
and dual-use satellites may also use agreed international communication and 
software standards, and often open architecture, which are not designed with 
security as a requirement and are known and understood by adversaries, 
increasing the potential for targeting or exploitation.
Section 3 – Space support to 
operations
2.17. Space support to operations enables and enhances the UK’s military 
capabilities, providing critical support to the combat effectiveness of the joint 
force. It is divided into five core functions, as shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3 – The components of space support to operations
Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
2.18. The ISR role develops situational awareness and enhances 
understanding, helping shape the conduct of operations.62 The synchronisation 
of information collected from space and the subsequent processing, 
exploitation and dissemination of it identifies trends, linkages and threats. It 
62 See AJP-2.7, Allied Joint Doctrine for Joint Intelligence, Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance  (with UK national elements) for more details.
Positioning,
navigation
and timing
Satellite
communications
Missile warning
and tracking
Intelligence,
surveillance and
reconnaissance
Space support to operations
Environmental
monitoring
40
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

supports decision-making by contributing to the identification of an adversary’s 
dependencies, vulnerabilities and strengths alongside understanding the 
human environment. ISR consists of three linked ‘inform’ functions.
a. Intelligence. Satellites do not directly deliver intelligence but 
provide timely, accurate and relevant information that is processed 
and potentially fused with other sources of information before being 
disseminated to users as intelligence. Intelligence informs political and 
military decision-making processes and makes a major contribution to 
assessing the intent of adversaries alongside assessments of when and 
how specific objectives, or even an end state, might be achieved.
b. Surveillance. Surveillance is the continuing and systematic 
observation of a wide area of interest. The area of interest can be 
in any one of the air, space, surface, sub-surface, electromagnetic 
or cyberspace environments, observed by visual, aural, electronic, 
photographic or other means. It is not orientated towards a specific 
target but is designed to provide warning of broad adversarial initiatives 
and to detect potential threats.
c. Reconnaissance. Reconnaissance complements surveillance by 
observing a specific area of interest to gain specific information about 
specific activities. Intelligence that is critical to the prosecution of current 
operations is often derived from reconnaissance operations so it should 
be evaluated and transmitted with minimum delay to those elements 
that need the information.
2.19. Benefits of space-based intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance. Using space-based ISR, either sovereign, alliance or 
commercial, as a component of a multi-domain ISR system can have a 
number of advantages. Some of these advantages are outlined below.
a. The perspective offered by space enables ISR satellites to cover 
an unmatched area of interest. They can be focused over a wide area 
or on a specific point of interest and conduct a number of ISR tasks, 
including passive imagery and electronic intelligence gathering.
b. Advanced sensor technologies have resulted in satellites being 
able to produce images of a resolution that can match or even eclipse 
those provided by some air platforms.
41
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

c. Despite the potential threat of OSC capabilities, ISR satellites 
may still be able to overfly hostile areas, which are impenetrable to 
ISR aircraft. This creates opportunities for fusing complementary 
capabilities, whereby satellites can plug gaps in other operational 
domain ISR capabilities and vice versa.
d. High resolution electro-optical and synthetic aperture radar 
imagery is now commercially available, with civilian assets capable of 
producing images of a quality that was previously only available at a 
classified military level. The rise of commercial ISR means that required 
data can be obtained from commercial sources, not just sovereign or 
allied capabilities. Commercial products therefore have the potential 
to plug gaps in capability, coverage or supplement over-tasked allied 
military capabilities. Conversely, commercial ISR may also be available 
to potential adversaries.
2.20. Challenges to intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. There 
are a number of challenges facing the ISR process. The following should be 
considered when assessing the value of space-based ISR.
a. The global presence offered by ISR satellites means they can 
offer an immediate response to a crisis to help build understanding. 
At the very least, they are likely to be first on the scene. However, their 
responsiveness, as well as being a strength, can also be limited. Large 
constellations of ISR satellites can offer significant resilience but there 
could still be gaps in coverage. There can be a misconception that 
space can provide persistent, continual monitoring. Space assets can 
provide persistence, but this is achieved through multiple revisits. It 
is therefore important to consider whether an area of interest can be 
covered, for how long and for how often, over a given period of time. This 
depends on the orbit of each satellite, which may limit responsiveness 
and coverage time during each orbit over a specific point.63
b. Large and exquisite sensors are built to specific requirements and 
timelines for construction are considerable, so reconstitution of assets 
can take time, especially for satellites in higher orbits that require larger 
and more complex launch platforms and procedures. This means 
that resilient architectures and collaborative arrangements are key for 
63 Any orbit represents a compromise between imagery resolution and the dwell time 
of the satellite. However, depending on the specific task, a low resolution image from a 
satellite in a higher orbit might suffice.
42
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

the current and likely future contested environment. Reconstituting 
a lost capability can be a long-term project, however, operationally 
responsive emerging technologies may offer options to meet shortfalls 
in coverage through the relatively rapid deployment of small satellites, 
albeit in lower orbits.64 Equally, responsive technologies could help 
maintain capability in a degraded environment where spacecraft life is 
reduced due to adverse space weather or high quantities of debris.
c. As well as space weather effects, it is important to remember 
that some space-based ISR systems are as susceptible to terrestrial 
weather as their air counterparts. An electro-optic/infrared satellite 
system may struggle to penetrate cloud or blown dust in the same way 
as an aircraft’s sensors. Ocean surveillance satellites may struggle in 
high sea states and high winds have the capability to move satellite 
dishes out of alignment, potentially compromising data links. 
Positioning, navigation and timing 
2.21. Positioning, navigation and timing (PNT) is the ability to determine 
location, time and velocity accurately and precisely. It is vital for civil and 
military applications, supporting fourth generation (4G) and fifth generation (5G) 
communications networks and a host of other civil uses as well as supporting 
defence capabilities.65
2.22. Space-derived PNT capabilities, delivered using global navigation 
satellite systems (GNSS), provide mission-essential data and information, 
which enable the effective execution of military operations. They provide 
precision navigation for military platforms and personnel; precision 
guidance for smart weapons; and precision timing for data links and secure 
communications. They give an integrated force the ability to effectively 
synchronise operations, whilst ensuring communications security. The Ministry 
of Defence (MOD) currently makes use of the US’ Global Positioning System 
(GPS), which provides position, velocity and time information to an unlimited 
number of users through civilian and encrypted military modes. The timing 
signal is particularly essential for secure communications and data transfer 
capabilities, such as data links.
2.23. Given the importance of PNT to military space operations, the US use 
the term ‘navigation warfare’ (NAVWAR) to describe ‘deliberate defensive and 
64 The UK is a world leader in small-satellite technology.
65 HM Government, National Space Strategy, September 2021.
43
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

offensive action to assure and prevent PNT information through coordinated 
employment of space, cyberspace and electronic warfare operations’.66 The 
mission of the Joint Navigation Warfare Center at Kirtland Air Force Base is to 
enable PNT superiority for the US Department of Defense, inter-agency and 
coalition partners; so, while the UK do not doctrinally recognise NAVWAR as 
part of PNT, the term is broadly used and is therefore included here given how 
closely UK military space operations are integrated with those of the US.
2.24. Challenges to positioning, navigation and timing. Although a GPS 
signal can be encrypted for military use, the technique used to transmit GPS 
data means that the power of the received signal is very low. Consequently, 
the GPS signal is susceptible to jamming or deceptive spoofing and even a 
low power jammer can prevent the receipt of GPS signals across an area of 
several square kilometres. Effective mitigation against GPS jamming is available, 
however, it comes with size, weight, power and cost implications that do not 
suit all users. The potential loss of GPS signal can also be mitigated by reducing 
the dependency on the system by developing capabilities and procedures 
that do not rely on space-derived PNT services or by seeking alternative 
PNT sources from other operational domains as part of a system of systems 
approach. Although the majority of UK military capabilities will continue to rely 
on GPS in the near term, alternative GNSS capabilities are being pursued to 
improve resilience. Following the decision to leave the European Union, the UK 
is no longer involved in developing the European Galileo GNSS, but the 2021 
National Space Strategy states that the UK government is ‘evaluating the case 
for investing in resilient PNT capabilities through a mixture of innovative new 
terrestrial and space-based technologies’.67
Satellite communications 
2.25. The ability to communicate and pass increasingly large amounts of 
data beyond line of sight is an essential military requirement, since terrain or 
horizon-masking can restrict radio communications. Satellite communications 
(SATCOM) relay data and voice transmissions through space, providing the 
ability to establish communications at any point on the globe. They enable 
communications at a range of classifications, between home bases and 
deployed forces, even in austere locations with poor infrastructure. They 
enable the dissemination of operationally critical ISR data and the control of 
remotely piloted aircraft systems at range. The global reach and effectiveness 
of the UK Armed Forces is therefore dependent on resilient SATCOM.
66 US Department of Defense (DOD), DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms .
67 HM Government, National Space Strategy, September 2021, page 34.
44
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

2.26. The UK’s secure SATCOM capability is currently provided through 
a private finance initiative (PFI) with Airbus, managed through Strategic 
Command.68 It provides a secure and resilient communications capability 
through the Skynet programme and other SATCOM resources from other 
providers. UK partners and allies also use Skynet bandwidth, which bolsters 
collaborative ties and, similarly, lost or degraded capabilities can be replaced 
by negotiating access to allies’ space services. Commercial bandwidth can 
provide redundancy for military systems as well as considerable advantages 
in terms of availability and coverage, but there are potential security risks if 
military communications are enabled by commercial satellites, which could 
be more vulnerable to jamming or have data-paths that are routed through 
unknown ground stations. Commercial satellites may also host foreign 
payloads. There are also risks in using commercial bandwidth because 
the terms of service provision could be significantly less than that provided 
through a dedicated military system. When choosing to use commercial 
providers, commanders must thoroughly understand the risks and benefits 
they face. In some cases, for example, using commercial satellite telephones 
in emergencies, tangible benefits may outweigh some security concerns in a 
commander’s calculus.
68 The PFI is scheduled to end in summer 2022 with the likely replacement being a 
government owned/civil operated model. This model is not discussed here as at the 
time of publishing, the exact nature of the new construct is still being refined by ongoing 
negotiations.
45
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power
Satellite communications relay data and voice transmissions through space, providing  
the ability to establish communications at any point on the globe

2.27 . As well as traditional voice and data transfer, a key element of modern 
communications is broadband Internet provision, which is increasingly vital 
for both military and civilian applications. To increase global broadband cover 
and connectivity, the UK government invested a US $500 million equity share 
in OneWeb in 2020, a LEO satellite company. It is envisaged that OneWeb 
will eventually have over 600 satellites in orbit, providing global reach and 
broadband connectivity while supporting the UK government’s aspirations for 
UK leadership in space-enabled capabilities and services. The availability of 
such systems may provide further options for military planners.
2.28. Challenges to satellite communications. Like all communications, 
SATCOM capability is often a trade-off between the range and bandwidth 
desired and the size of antennas, power systems and processors needed 
to generate it. Compromises also need to be made between frequencies 
used, which are constrained by the laws of physics, and which are affected 
differently during their transmission through the atmosphere. Orbits themselves 
also need careful consideration. Stable geosynchronous Earth orbits (GEO) 
provide constant coverage and reduce the need for complex satellite tracking 
procedures but the cost of launching satellites into this regime can greatly 
exceed that for those in lower orbits. In addition, coverage from GEO is 
reduced towards the poles and their higher altitude can increase the time delay 
or latency of the information passed. While this may be acceptable as a delay 
on a telephone call, it could be catastrophic when trying to land a remotely 
piloted air vehicle.69
69 Detailed information on SATCOM challenges and the compromises needed to mitigate 
them can be found in the MOD’s The UK Military Space Primer.
Enhanced Skynet
Skynet is a family of military communications satellites, operated on 
behalf of the MOD. Skynet 4 and Skynet 5 satellites are currently operational. 
In July 2020, the MOD signed a £500 million contract with Airbus to 
extend and enhance the Skynet fleet. This will involve the development, 
manufacture, cyber protection, assembly, integration, test and launch of a 
military communications satellite, Skynet 6A, planned for launch in 2025. 
The contract also covers technology development programmes, new secure 
telemetry, tracking and command systems, launch, in-orbit testing and 
ground segment updates to the current Skynet 5 system.
46
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Missile warning and tracking
2.29. Missile warning and tracking, specifically of ballistic missiles, forms 
part of the overall concept of integrated air and missile defence (IAMD), 
which the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) defines as: all measures 
to contribute to deter any air and missile threat or to nullify or reduce the 
effectiveness of hostile air action in order to protect populations, territory and 
forces against the full spectrum of air and missile threats.70 Space-based 
missile warning systems are designed to detect, track, identify and assess 
ballistic missiles and their flight paths as well as predicting their likely time and 
point of impact. They form one component of an overall IAMD capability that 
must also integrate layers of surface-based sensors and interceptors.
2.30. The ground-based ballistic missiles early warning and tracking system 
at RAF Fylingdales is such a sensor, feeding into a US global system and 
making a significant contribution to the overall missile warning function. The 
UK SpOC works closely with RAF Fylingdales to ensure that missile warning 
details are disseminated. The US space-based infrared system provides a 
space-based ballistic missiles warning and tracking capability, the output from 
which is shared with allies, including the UK.
2.31. Challenges to missile warning and tracking. Once the sole property 
of the major powers, recent times have seen a proliferation of ballistic missiles 
passing into the hands of militias and other organisations willing to use 
them, making the assessment of the threat they pose more challenging.71 
Combined with this are difficulties in physically locating ballistic missile systems 
themselves prior to launch, complicating any targeting process. Ground-based 
and naval systems are highly mobile and certain adversaries now possess 
the capability to launch ballistic missiles from air platforms. Once airborne, 
detection, identification and tracking are made more difficult by modern 
ballistic missiles having reduced radar cross sections and possessing multiple, 
in some cases manoeuvrable, re-entry vehicles containing a mixture of 
warheads and decoys.
70 NATOTerm.
71 The Yemeni Houthi militia have repeatedly used ballistic missiles to attack Saudi Arabia.
47
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Environmental monitoring 
2.32. The challenges presented by a changing world climate, with an increased 
likelihood of population migration and disaster relief operations, have made 
terrestrial environmental monitoring of pivotal importance.72 Furthermore, 
predicted increases in solar activity prior to the forecast solar maximum in 
2025–26, alongside the exponential growth in the numbers of satellites on 
orbit, has meant that the monitoring of space weather is equally crucial. Space 
assets potentially have advantages in environmental monitoring. The attributes of 
access and persistence mean that satellites can potentially have enduring global 
coverage. They can also be used to monitor austere or even toxic environments 
without endangering personnel. The National Space Strategy states that 
space will be used to tackle global challenges, including climate change and 
biodiversity loss. As well as these universal challenges, environmental monitoring 
can provide data that is essential for military operations.
2.33. Data derived from space assets can provide information on 
meteorological, oceanographic and environmental factors that may affect the 
planning and execution of military operations, be it from space weather or 
terrestrial weather. Synthetic aperture radar capabilities can track weather fronts 
and provide data on ocean waves and a variety of multispectral capabilities 
can measure humidity, cloud cover and the composition of terrain materials. 
Increasingly, new technologies such as hyperspectral imaging and LIDAR73 are 
also increasing the quantity and quality of information available for scientific 
analysis. Space-derived terrestrial weather monitoring also contributes to 
a significant proportion of long-range weather forecasting. This function is 
therefore a key enabler because it provides operationally significant information 
on sub-surface, surface and air conditions, which has utility for multi-domain 
operations. As well as purely defence functions, under an integrated approach, 
Defence space systems can contribute surveillance data and information to 
our partners across government for vital tasks such as terrestrial environmental 
monitoring, disaster relief and infrastructure development.
2.34. Challenges to environmental monitoring. While a large number of 
environmental monitoring satellites have been launched, global coverage in 
some regions can still be a challenge. For example, changing polar conditions 
may require constant monitoring but that is not always possible using low orbit 
72 MOD, Global Strategic Trends – The Future Starts Today, 6th Edition, 2018.
73 A portmanteau of light and RADAR, LIDAR is primarily a technique for measuring 
distance by laser ranging, the technology can also create a three-dimensional 
representation of the surveyed environment.
48
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

polar-orbiting satellites given their revisit times. While this can be addressed 
using other orbital regimes, there can be a trade-off between the desired 
area of coverage and fidelity of imagery. In addition, once a satellite has been 
launched, constantly recalibrating it to ensure comparable data over time is 
difficult, potentially compromising the overall information it provides. Finally, 
environmental monitoring requires simultaneous monitoring of a number of 
interrelated factors, which can be a challenge for an individual space system 
with a limited payload. Space-derived data therefore needs to be combined 
with additional other data from other satellites alongside sensors in other 
operational domains to provide a more complete picture of the environmental 
system as a whole.
Section 4 – Space service support
2.35. Space service support consists of operations that launch space 
assets and maintain and sustain them. It comprises launch operations and 
satellite operations.
2.36. Launch operations. These 
operations are fundamental to the ability 
to participate in space-based activities 
as they deliver satellites, payloads and 
material into space. Due to the associated 
cost of this activity, the UK has historically 
relied on allies and third-party launch 
capabilities such as those of the US, 
India and the European Space Agency to 
deliver UK satellites into orbit. However, 
the National Space Strategy considers 
space launch to be a prerequisite to acting 
in space and has committed the UK to 
possessing a sovereign space launch 
capability by 2022, capable of launching 
small satellites through LaunchUK, the UK 
Space Agency’s spaceflight programme. 
This offers the potential for a responsive 
launch capability, where satellites with 
bespoke payloads can be held ready 
for rapid launch if and when required. 
Such satellites could also be designed 
49
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power
A UK Skynet 5D satellite is launched on board  
an Ariane rocket from French Guiana

to be easily replaceable should they be lost, become unserviceable or if their 
payloads required updating. Replaceable LEO satellites could also be designed 
to degrade their orbits and burn up by re-entering the Earth’s atmosphere at 
the end of their operational life, thus avoiding creating more space debris.
2.37. Satellite operations. These operations involve the manoeuvring, 
sustainment and maintenance of satellites. The MOD currently depends on 
commercial providers for this function, although this may not be the case in the 
future. 
2.38. Challenges to space service support. While LaunchUK will provide 
elements of sovereign capability, this will be for small satellites on very specific 
orbits.74 For larger satellites, or those which need to be placed in higher or less 
inclined orbits, the UK will still need to rely on allies, partners or commercial 
entities, raising issues of assurance, security and responsiveness. Such a 
reliance can be exploited: for example, a number of the UK part-owned OneWeb 
satellites were intended to be launched by Russia but sanctions over the invasion 
of Ukraine have led to the launch being cancelled and the satellites impounded 
in Russia with the resulting potential for their technology to be exploited.
Overlap between roles
2.39. The space power roles, illustrated in Figure 2.4, are a good framework 
within which to view activity in space; however, they are not absolute and 
overlap between the roles will inevitably occur. Space control overlaps in a 
number of areas with SDA and space support to operations. For example, 
SATCOM electromagnetic interference detection and mitigation could be 
considered as part of DSC or space support to operations (a combination of 
ISR and SATCOM). The satellite warning service could be viewed as DSC, SDA 
or ISR. Given the UK currently splits responsibility (including for development 
and funding) for the elements of space power between a number of different 
military commands and civil agencies, some delineation is important. When 
considering capabilities and activities that overlap doctrinal or domain 
boundaries, the following delineations may prove useful: SDA provides the 
information on which operational decisions can be made. Activities and 
capabilities designed to mitigate threats identified using SDA information are 
generally classified as space control, which includes the protect and defend 
mission, while space support to operations may only include the delivery of 
space services to terrestrial operations and not necessarily address the threats 
to those services.
74 For more information concerning the impact of launch latitude on orbit parameters, see 
the MOD’s The UK Military Space Primer, June 2010.
50
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Figure 2.4 – UK space power roles
2.40. Overlap will also happen with other operational domains. For example, 
targeting an adversary’s ground segment infrastructure with carrier-based 
aircraft could correctly be considered a maritime strike mission, an air attack 
mission or OSC. No definition can cover all eventualities and therefore if there 
is a need to differentiate, the mission should be labelled in accordance with the 
desired effect, rather than purely the means.
Space
control
Space support 
to operations
Space domain
awareness
Space service
support
Offensive
space control
Intelligence,
surveillance and
reconnaissance
Launch operations
Defensive
space control
Positioning, navigation
and timing Satellite operations
Satellite
communications
Missile warning
and tracking
Environmental
monitoring
UK space power
Space situational 
awareness
Space surveillance 
and tracking
51
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Key points
• The UK consider there to be four key space power roles: space domain 
awareness, space control, space support to operations and space 
service support.
• Space domain awareness combines situational awareness with 
surveillance and the tracking of space objects to provide information 
to assist allied space effects while successfully mitigating those of 
adversaries.
• Space control is the use of defensive and offensive capabilities to 
assure access and freedom of action in space.
• Space support to operations enables and enhances the UK’s military 
capabilities, providing critical support to combat effectiveness.
• Space service support consists of operations that launch space assets 
and maintain and sustain them.
52
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

Notes
53
JDP 0-40
2
The roles of space power

[Page 66: No extractable text]

Chapter 3 discusses how UK space command and control 
is conducted. It begins by discussing general principles, 
before moving on to cover specifics relating to the space 
domain.
Section 1 – Principles of command and control  . . . . 57
Section 2 – UK space command and control  . . . . . 60
55
JDP 0-40
Chapter 3

This [space] strategy is about 
more than capabilities. It is 
about partnerships. Government 
working as one with industry and 
international allies.
 
 
Jeremy Quinn MP , Minister for Defence 
Procurement, February 2022 
”
“
56
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

Chapter 3
Space command and 
control, coordination and 
planning
Section 1 – Principles of command and 
control
3.1. Space power is rarely used in isolation but forms part of an integrated 
approach comprising operations across multiple operational domains set 
alongside cross-government activities. These actions must be directed and 
timed appropriately to maximise the effects they can create. Space is a global 
domain which can overlay multiple theatres and joint operations areas, creating 
competing demands to prioritise often scarce resources. These resources 
may be highly classified or owned by allies, commercial entities or partners 
across government. Effective command and control is therefore the key 
enabler, without which the fundamental space power roles cannot be delivered 
effectively, irrespective of the size or nature of an operation.
3.2. Command and control definitions. The following North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) definitions of command and control are used in this 
publication.
a. Command. The authority vested in a member of the armed forces 
for the direction, coordination, and control of military forces. (NATOTerm)
b. Control. The authority exercised by a commander over part of 
the activities of subordinate organizations, or other organizations not 
normally under their command, encompassing the responsibility for 
implementing orders or directives. (NATOTerm)
57
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

Methods of command and control
3.3. Unity of command or unity of purpose. Traditionally, military command 
and control has been underpinned by the principle of unity of command. 
In this, responsibility for the conduct of a campaign is vested in a single 
responsible commander, the joint force commander (JFC), who could 
reasonably expect to have command and control of all of the military assets 
allocated to them for completion of the task. Under the integrated approach, 
however, many space assets and space capabilities will not be under a JFC’s 
direct command but will in fact be owned by other actors who will often have 
their own separate aims. Instead, therefore, the JFC may need to create the 
effects and obtain desired capabilities by seeking to align multiple actors 
through a common unity of purpose. Regardless, several enduring critical 
elements of command and control endure. A commander must understand 
and determine the operational context, create their intent to determine the 
campaign design, provide timely direction and guidance to facilitate effective 
planning and then set the freedoms and constraints within which subordinates 
can operate. This may, however, need to be communicated to and negotiated 
with other stakeholders rather than being simply directed.
3.4. Centralised control and decentralised execution. The UK’s preferred 
method of command and control for joint operations is ‘centralised control and 
decentralised execution’ where overall control is held centrally by the JFC but 
responsibility for executing plans is delegated to subordinate commanders 
at the lowest practical level. In an era of persistent competition, there are 
benefits of centralised control as many previously tactical decisions may need 
to be made at the strategic level due to their potential to influence audiences. 
Maintaining centralised control allows competing demands to be prioritised 
and apportioned, mitigating the risk of assets being inappropriately tasked by 
uncoordinated users against impractical objectives or being diluted into smaller 
packages that lessen their overall effect. In terms of executing tasks, however, 
no single commander is likely to have the level of situational awareness 
required to centrally manage all concurrent activities. Decentralised execution 
delegates execution authority to subordinate or on-scene commanders who 
have a greater awareness of their immediate situation. It is an efficient method 
when dealing with complex campaigns, especially where communications 
may be degraded or denied. It is underpinned by the doctrinal tenet of mission 
command (see Chapter 4), but it may not always be easily achievable for UK 
space capabilities given the dispersed nature of space power role ownership, 
although this situation is improving as UK Space Command matures and 
adopts responsibility for more of the space power roles.
58
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

3.5. Other command and control approaches. If centralised control and 
decentralised execution are not appropriate or even possible in the space 
domain, two other options exist that can be adopted to suit a specific 
operation or task. These options are centralised control, centralised execution 
and decentralised control, decentralised execution.
a. Centralised control, centralised execution. Centralised execution 
authority may be necessary for space command and control where the 
highest-value space assets are being employed or where there is a risk 
that the use of a classified space asset may divulge or infer its existence 
or capability. It might also be appropriate when there is a requirement 
to closely manage tactical activities that might have strategic effects, 
accepting this may adversely affect tactical efficiency or responsiveness.
b. Decentralised control, decentralised execution. The decentralised 
control and execution of space power is not routinely envisaged. It exists 
as an option, should it be required, to improve responsiveness in the 
event of fallback or if resilience operations are required.
59
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning
As UK Space Command matures it will adopt responsibility for more of the space power roles

Componency
3.6. The organisational command and control framework employed for 
UK operations depends primarily on the scale, size and complexity of the 
operating area. For small-scale, low intensity operations in a non-contested 
operating environment, command and control provided ‘at range’ from the UK 
may be appropriate, often enabled using space-based communications. More 
complex operations are usually best served by a deployable, or permanent, 
in-theatre command and control capability, especially when an operation is 
NATO-led, UK-led within a NATO framework or conducted by a multinational 
coalition.
3.7. At the operational level, the UK uses the concept of component 
organisation to cohere multi-domain activity under a JFC, particularly for a 
deployed joint force. The 2* Standing Joint Force Headquarters (SJFHQ) 
provides this capability for the UK for small and medium sized operations. 
A JFC may exercise command and control of integrated operations within a 
joint operations area from their own headquarters, augmented by component 
liaison officers and other subject matter experts. It is more usual, however, 
for the JFC to appoint component commanders for the components of 
maritime, land, air and special forces. At the current time, the joint force 
space component commander (JFSCC) function is provided by the UK Space 
Command Headquarters (see paragraph 3.10).
Section 2 – UK space command and 
control
Command and control by space power role
3.8. The command and control of UK space elements varies, depending on 
which space power role is being considered. Military operational command is 
delegated by the Chief of the Defence Staff as follows.
a. Operational command for space control and space domain 
awareness (SDA) are delegated to Commander UK Space Command. 
The UK Space Operations Centre (UK SpOC) is the operational 
command and control unit for Defence in these areas.
60
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

b. Operational command for space support to operations is currently 
delegated to Commander Strategic Command (UKStratCom) with 
Defence Digital Operations and the Global Operations and Security 
Control Centre at Ministry of Defence (MOD) Corsham managing 
satellite communications (SATCOM) and intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance (ISR) being managed through Defence Intelligence 
via the Joint Intelligence Operations Centre at Royal Air Force (RAF) 
Wyton. While the UK currently does not possess positioning, navigation 
and timing assets in space, UKStratCom coordinates positioning, 
navigation and timing considerations while delegating responsibility 
for operational integration to the front line commands. Environmental 
monitoring, specifically the use of space to inform terrestrial weather 
forecasting, is the responsibility of the Joint Operations Meteorology 
and Oceanographic Centre75 and Defence Intelligence. The UK SpOC 
is the Defence customer for space weather with the Met Office under 
UKStratCom’s authority. Missile warning is conducted in the UK by the 
RAF and at sea by the Royal Navy with the UK SpOC coordinating it at 
national or global scale.
c. The MOD does not currently conduct command and control of 
space service support assets. They are conducted by commercial 
entities and partners across government.
Prioritising space capabilities
3.9. The attributes of space power mean that space assets can often have 
global effects. As such, a satellite on orbit may physically be able to support 
several JFCs operating simultaneously in different joint operations areas. 
Space assets are, however, finite, both in terms of numbers and payload 
capacity, for example, the bandwidth a communications satellite can carry. In 
addition, certain capabilities may have additional resource demands that place 
limitations on supporting multiple customers.76 To mitigate potential frictions, 
the responsibility for the strategic prioritisation of UK military space capabilities 
is retained centrally within the MOD. This allows space support to be efficiently 
prioritised between potentially competing customers.
75 The Joint Operations Meteorology and Oceanographic Centre is a military joint enabling 
centre staffed by Met Office and military personnel.
76 For example, the processing, exploitation and dissemination of space-derived ISR may 
be subject to finite limits in terms of the time and resource needed to provide a product. 
Analysts and automated systems engaged in one task may not be able to simultaneously 
support others.
61
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

Command and liaison elements
3.10. Joint force space component commander. At the current time, the 
JFSCC function is provided by the UK Space Command Headquarters (see 
paragraph 3.13), who can provide a JFSCC from OF-5 to 2* rank depending on 
the scale of the operation and the JFC’s requirements.77 Space effects required 
by the JFC’s headquarters and those of the component commanders are 
created and coordinated by a network of space liaison officers, overseen by a 
senior space liaison officer located within UK Space Command Headquarters. 
These officers are specialist space operations officers who assist their 
components by increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of forces with 
regards to ISR, missile warning, space and terrestrial weather impacts, 
communications, positioning, navigation and timing and maximising the utility 
of space-enabled technologies. How these mission areas support their host 
components will vary with each operation and will depend on the space 
resources available. Liaison officers can be augmented with additional staff 
if required. They collaborate with other divisions within the component, key 
allies, commercial mission partners and space operations centres to provide 
support and products for strategy development, targeting, mission planning 
and current operations as follows.
a. Component planning. The space liaison officer and, if appropriate, 
their team, assist the component planning process by providing advice 
on available space capabilities and intelligence on the adversary’s 
space order of battle, including enemy space capabilities, vulnerabilities 
and centres of gravity, limitations and threats to allied forces. During 
estimates, the liaison officer determines the requirements for space 
support, develops a space support plan and writes any relevant 
operations plan annexes. Additionally, they provide subject matter 
expertise and advise on the targeting of adversarial space capabilities.
b. Provide capability. After determining requirements for space in the 
campaign, the space liaison officer establishes all available capabilities 
and processes necessary to execute the space support plan. The 
plan’s execution involves generating and submitting space support 
requests to the appropriate coordination centre. For UK operations, this 
will be the UK SpOC but for deployed operations, liaison may be with 
host nation or coalition equivalents, if appropriate.
77 This is achieved by dual-tasking officers from within the UK Space Command space 
operations pillar.
62
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

c. Provide awareness. The space liaison officer provides SDA to 
the host component in coordination with the SDA team in the UK 
SpOC. Such awareness typically concerns any significant operational 
impacts due to events in space, including the degradation or loss of 
any space capabilities. It should be remembered that due to orbital 
mechanics, space assets may not be present in, or remain within, a 
commander’s joint operations area; therefore, awareness of any matters 
that may affect the asset through the whole of its orbital path should be 
considered.
d. Execution. During the execution of operations, the space liaison 
officer actively participates from the component operations room. They 
provide missile warning, threat indications and warnings, support to 
joint personnel recovery efforts and assistance with dynamic targeting 
processes.
3.11. Inter-component variations. While the overall tasks of the space liaison 
officers are similar, their location, command and control responsibilities and 
some tasks vary between organisations. Details of the different organisations 
are as follows.
a. Permanent Joint Headquarters. Space support to Permanent 
Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) is facilitated by a space liaison officer who 
sits within the J3 Joint Effects Cell. With PJHQ being the MOD’s hub for 
operational-level full spectrum targeting, the space liaison officer also 
provides space representation on targeting boards and effects reviews.
b. Standing Joint Force Headquarters. The UK maintains an SJFHQ 
to provide a 2* operational-level headquarters at very high readiness 
that can liaise across government departments, allies and partners 
as required. It can provide command and control for sovereign, 
multinational and inter-agency operations. The SJFHQ space liaison 
officer again sits within the J3 Joint Effects Cell but supports both 
the SJFHQ and its two subordinate 1* headquarters (Joint Force 
Headquarters and the Standing Joint Force Logistics Commander) in 
creating the required effects for Defence. The liaison officer provides 
support to all elements of the headquarters over a wide range of 
operations ranging from non-combatant evacuation operations and 
deployed logistics operations to high tempo sub-threshold multinational 
operations. SJFHQ also supports two multinational frameworks: the 
63
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

Joint Expeditionary Force78 and the Combined Joint Expeditionary 
Force,79 as well as integrating across government.
c. Maritime. The Royal Navy possess a standing 2* maritime 
component commander, Commander UK Strike Force, alongside three 
subordinate deployable 1* staffs (the carrier strike group, the littoral 
strike group and 3 Commando Brigade). Space support to the maritime 
domain is provided by the space liaison officer, who currently sits within 
the carrier strike force joint effects cell. The carrier strike force space 
liaison officer is used primarily within carrier strike force headquarters, 
but also provides support to the 2* maritime component commander 
and the other 1* subordinate units and can be deployed with them if 
necessary.
d. Air. Space support to the joint force air component commander 
is provided by a dedicated Space Operations Section within its 
Combat Operations Division. The Combat Operations Division’s Space 
Operations Section is staffed by specialist space operations officers who 
can be augmented should the operational tempo necessitate it.
Organisations and units
3.12. MOD Space Directorate. The MOD Space Directorate was established 
in September 2019 and is part of the MOD Head Office. It has linkages 
to the UK Space Agency, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy, Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, Home Office, 
wider government departments and key allies. It sets the MOD’s overarching 
space policy, strategy and objectives and provides space capability coherence 
across the single Services to ensure Defence efforts are aligned with the 
national ambition in space as well as providing value for money. Direction 
from the government’s National Space Council flows through the MOD Space 
Directorate to UK Space Command and other relevant elements of Defence.80
78 The Joint Expeditionary Force comprises: the UK, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, 
Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden.
79 The Combined Joint Expeditionary Force comprises the UK and France.
80 While correct at the time of publishing, under the MOD Head Office Review, 
some functions currently performed by the MOD Space Directorate are likely to be 
disaggregated: with elements concerning space policy to MOD Security, Policy and 
Operations; space capability strategic plans to MOD Finance and Military Capability; and 
other functions being transferred to UK Space Command. The Defence Operating Model 
‘direct’ function is are likely to still be delivered by a Space Directorate in some form, but 
this structure is currently under review.
64
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

3.13. UK Space Command. Formed at RAF High Wycombe on 1 April 2021, 
UK Space Command is a joint command staffed from across the single 
Services, the Civil Service and key members of the commercial sector. When 
fully operational, it will provide command and control of all of Defence’s space 
capabilities, including the UK SpOC, Skynet satellite communications, RAF 
Fylingdales and other enabling capabilities. UK Space Command also has 
extremely close links to UKStratCom and the Defence Science and Technology 
Laboratory, specifically to examine options for developing new capabilities 
to enable multi-domain integration and capitalise on the research and 
development expertise that exists within Defence. UK Space Command also 
interacts with the UK Space Agency to deliver joint national space capability.
3.14. UK Space Operations Centre. The UK SpOC is the primary point 
of contact for UK Defence space-related matters at the operational level. It 
delivers the RAF’s space control and SDA capabilities and has tactical control 
65
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning
UK Space Command is a joint command staffed from across the single Services, the Civil  
Service and key members of the commercial sector

authority over RAF Fylingdales.81 The UK SpOC has an enduring working 
relationship with the United States (US) Combined Space Operations Centre, 
allowing significant access to US space-derived information in support of 
operations. It can also provide expertise to assist component commanders in 
integrating space capabilities and effects into their own operational planning 
processes. The UK SpOC areas of responsibility primarily include the following.
a. Threat warning and attack assessment. The UK SpOC provides 
continuous, timely, accurate and unambiguous strategic warning. 
It also provides ballistic missile attack assessment for the UK and 
deployed forces.
b. Space launches. The UK SpOC routinely monitors and reports 
all space launches around the world. It is increasingly common for 
multiple satellites to be placed in orbit using a single launch vehicle, 
either for efficiency or in an attempt to covertly insert objects into orbit. 
RAF Fylingdales has the capability to track certain low Earth orbit 
satellites, providing regular updates on any subsequent manoeuvres 
that are carried out, which may provide indications as to the nature of 
the satellite.
c. Detection, characterisation and tracking. The UK SpOC is 
required to contribute to SDA by seeking to understand events 
occurring in space such as the detection, tracking and potential 
attribution of any direct ascent or co-orbital anti-satellite weapon.  
The UK SpOC also seeks to detect any non-kinetic threats, either  
via its own sensors or by using information derived from those of  
allies and partners.
81 RAF Fylingdales provides a ballistic missile warning and space surveillance service for 
both the United States (US) and UK. Whilst ballistic missile warning will remain the priority 
for the foreseeable future, the phased array radar is able to carry out space surveillance 
tasks when not being used in this primary role, providing the UK with a significant SDA 
capability. Forming part of the US Space Surveillance Network, the unit provides data to 
a catalogue of space objects maintained by the US and shared with the UK SpOC and 
provides information to both the UK and US on the orbital decay and re-entry of objects.
66
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

d. Rendezvous and proximity operations. Increasingly, consideration 
must be given to the behaviour of satellites known or suspected to be 
controlled by potential adversaries. Accordingly, the UK SpOC is rapidly 
developing the means by which to detect and monitor on-orbit threats 
which approach friendly assets, providing warning and attribution when 
necessary.
e. Satellite warning. As the number of countries with access to 
satellite-based ISR capabilities continues to increase, there can be a 
requirement to protect Defence-related activities from being observed 
by these platforms. In conjunction with Defence Intelligence, the 
satellite warning service aims to provide an awareness of the overhead 
ISR threat to aid users in their decision-making processes.
67
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning
RAF Fylingdales solid state phased array radar
The solid state phased array radar at RAF Fylingdales can search 
for, identify and track missiles and other objects over 10 centimetres in size 
to a range of around 3,000 nautical miles. The radar has a 360° field of view 
with each of the three faces providing 120° coverage. The radar typically 
collects data on 3,000 objects a day. There are approximately 22,000 objects 
visible out to low Earth orbit of which Fylingdales can track around 65%.


f. Conjunctions. Conjunctions82 can create large debris fields which 
have the capability in turn to cause additional conjunctions with other 
satellites in a ‘domino effect’. To militate against this risk, the US 
operates a global network of ground-based and orbital sensors (the 
US Space Surveillance Network) to track space objects and provide 
warning of potential collisions. RAF Fylingdales is an integral part of 
this network. This is especially important when crewed space vehicles 
such as the International Space Station are involved. With enough 
warning, some operational satellites, and even the International Space 
Station, can be manoeuvred to avoid or reduce the risk of collisions. 
The UK SpOC also has access to the conjunction warnings provided 
by the US.
g. Atmospheric re-entry. All objects in orbit gradually lose altitude 
and eventually fall back to Earth over time. Although most objects burn 
up as they pass through the atmosphere, some larger objects can 
survive the atmospheric re-entry, and impact the Earth’s surface. When 
the UK falls within a predicted impact area, the UK SpOC and Defence 
Intelligence will issue advisory notifications to government response 
agencies.
h. Space weather. The UK SpOC acts as the UK Defence point of 
contact into the Met Office Space Weather Operations Centre. They 
will notify any relevant parties who may be affected by space weather 
events.
Planning
3.15. Space component planning is conducted by the UK Space Command 
Headquarters Plans Pillar and the UK SpOC. Given the close relationship 
between the UK and the US in terms of space operations, the UK SpOC is 
closely aligned with the US Combined Space Operations Centre planning 
process. The UK is represented during allied Combined Space Operations 
Centre planning with the UK contribution set out within an applicable space 
operations directive and space instructions.
3.16. For national operations, space effects are integrated into the planning 
processes of their host commands using that command’s own planning 
process, facilitated by their component space liaison officers. Space liaison 
officers, commanders and headquarters can request space effects via either a 
82 Collisions between objects on orbit.
68
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

request for information/intelligence to the Joint Intelligence Operations Centre 
or via space support requests to the UK SpOC. Allied space capabilities 
can also be requested via the UK SpOC.83 Support for SATCOM and ISR is 
requested through UKStratCom and should typically remain domain agnostic: 
requesters should bid for the effect they desire not a specific capability or 
platform. For example, a beyond line of sight communications solution might 
not necessarily be delivered by SATCOM and the type of platform collecting 
ISR should be immaterial to the requester, as long as the product provided 
answers the specific request made.
83 A plain-English product catalogue is available from the UK SpOC that explains the 
capabilities and services available and how to request them.
69
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

Key points
• Space power is rarely used in isolation but forms part of an integrated 
approach.
• Space assets and space capabilities will often not be under the direct 
command of a military JFC.
• Commanders may need to create effects and obtain capabilities by 
seeking to align multiple actors through a common unity of purpose.
• UK Space Command Headquarters can provide a JFSCC function from 
OF-5 to 2* rank as necessary.
• Within individual components, space effects are created and coordinated 
by a network of space liaison officers.
• The UK SpOC is the primary point of contact for UK Defence 
space-related matters at the operational level.
70
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

Notes
71
JDP 0-40
3
Space command and control, coordination and planning

72
JDP 0-40


© Tomas Marek / Shutterstock.com
73
JDP 0-40
Chapter 4 sets out how space power is applied within the 
integrated approach. It discusses the three tenets of UK 
Defence doctrine, sets out how space is integrated with the 
other operational domains and then goes on to consider the 
role of space power in deterrence.
Chapter 4
Section 1 – Space and the integrated approach . . . . 75
Section 2 – Integration between operational domains  . 77
Section 3 – Space and deterrence. . . . . . . . . . . 81

We will make the UK a meaningful 
actor in space, with an integrated 
space strategy which brings 
together military and civil space 
policy for the first time.
 
 
Integrated Review,  
16 March 2021”
“
74
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

Chapter 4
The employment of space 
power
Section 1 – Space and the integrated 
approach
4.1. As set out in Chapter 1, the UK government pursues its objectives by 
leveraging four instruments of national power: diplomatic, information, military 
and economic. Military forces are therefore rarely used in isolation but are 
often integrated and synchronised with partners across government. This 
provides more options for decision-makers to use all of the instruments of 
national power towards common national goals. This is referred to by the UK 
government as the integrated approach and it is similar to the comprehensive 
approach used by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
4.2. Under the military instrument, Defence considers space to be one 
of five interconnected operational domains,84 which together or separately 
provide options for employing the military instrument. While space is now 
considered an operational domain in its own right, it remains a key enabler for 
the other domains. As technology advances, it could be argued to be more 
important than ever given the reliance other operational domains have on 
positioning, navigation and timing (PNT), satellite communications (SATCOM) 
and other space-enabled capabilities. As such, space power is most effective 
when integrated with other components of military power, benefiting from 
complementary capabilities and exploiting synergies between the operational 
domains. Such activity has previously been termed ‘joint action’; however, 
this is now considered to be too narrow and too focused on the role of the 
military instrument rather than considering wider audiences. In addition, joint 
action focused on integrating the traditional three operational domains of 
maritime, land and air at the expense of space and cyber and electromagnetic. 
Accordingly, the new Integrated Operating Concept and Joint Doctrine 
Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine advocate moving towards three 
doctrinal tenets.
84 Maritime, land, air, space and cyber and electromagnetic.
75
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

a. Integrated action. Integrated action is the orchestrated use of 
a full range of capabilities to change or maintain the attitude and 
behaviour of audiences necessary to achieve a successful outcome. 
As such it is audience instead of adversary focused and places 
understanding the audience as its major consideration. Audiences are 
increasingly interconnected by technological capabilities in the cyber 
and electromagnetic domain, which are in turn enabled by and carried 
through the space domain. Space power therefore enables integrated 
action.
b. Manoeuvrist approach. The manoeuvrist approach is more 
adversary focused and seeks to operate indirectly, pitting strength 
against an adversary’s identified vulnerabilities to undermine an 
adversary’s will and cohesion. Some aspects of space power, such as 
space-based intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) may 
be vital for providing the knowledge necessary to enable manoeuvre by 
identifying such key vulnerabilities that can then be targeted by platforms 
operating in other operational domains. The principle of economy of 
effort can also apply to the space domain – a correctly targeted action 
can have a disproportionate effect.
c. Mission command. Mission command can enable the previous 
two tenets by enabling operational flexibility. Rather than directing all 
aspects of an operation, a commander instead clearly sets out their 
intent but permits subordinates freedom to take the initiative and achieve 
that intent within set boundaries. It is a form of decentralised execution 
that can work well in some operational domains but may not always 
be suited to the space domain. Space assets are typically held at the 
strategic level given their scarcity and, on occasion, their classification; 
therefore, delegating their use may risk the capability being divulged or 
inappropriately used. Many space assets may also not be in the direct 
command of the military commander but may belong to partners across 
government or other allies. Effective liaison with these partners and allies 
is therefore critical to integrating space capabilities.
76
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

Section 2 – Integration between 
operational domains
4.3. Military manoeuvre in one operational domain is increasingly enabled 
by effects from all of the other four domains. To optimise capability and 
succeed on operations, stovepipes between operational domains and the 
levels of operations must be broken down, a concept termed multi-domain 
integration.85 Before this can happen, however, current integration between 
space and the other operational domains must be fully understood.
Integration with the maritime domain
4.4. The maritime use of high-end technology and their pursuit of networked 
warfare systems, while providing considerable advantages, has also placed 
a great reliance on space-derived systems and products. PNT signals, often 
derived from space, are vital for the efficient operation of many systems and 
subsystems, including secure tactical data links that are often also enabled 
by space-based timing signals. Maritime platforms are also particularly reliant 
on beyond the horizon communications systems such as SATCOM, both for 
command and control purposes and for passing situational awareness data 
between elements of a dispersed force.
4.5. Of particular relevance to maritime operations is the threat posed by 
space-based ISR. Traditionally, maritime operations relied on the ability to 
manoeuvre to avoid detection and therefore achieve an element of surprise 
or at least pose elements of uncertainly to the opposing commander. The 
prevalence of increasingly persistent space-based ISR, including commercial 
ISR, across all aspects of the electromagnetic spectrum (EMS) threatens to 
limit this advantage. When combined with improvements in the lethality of 
anti-ship missile systems and over the horizon targeting, space-based ISR 
becomes a more serious threat to maritime systems. Space-based ISR can 
also collect technical data on the performance of active maritime sensors, 
allowing their performance to be deduced. For all these reasons, accurate 
assessment of adversarial satellite collection windows and capabilities are 
essential. Therefore, integration with space capabilities such as the satellite 
warning service provided by the UK Space Operations Centre (UK SpOC) 
at Royal Air Force (RAF) High Wycombe is vital to provide an awareness of 
85 See Joint Concept Note 1/20, Multi-Domain Integration  for further details. A second 
edition of this concept is in development.
77
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

the overhead ISR threat to aid the maritime decision-making and planning 
process.86
Integration with the land domain
4.6. As land forces increasingly digitise they become even more heavily 
dependent on space support to operations. Land forces are almost completely 
dependent on space for their PNT needs, with very limited recourse to 
non-space-based systems given Global Positioning System (GPS) services are 
integrated into most land systems, from tactical radios to missile systems. For 
example, a number of extended range rocket munitions, either currently fielded 
or in development, rely on GPS to complement inertial guidance while tactical 
radios rely on GPS for timing to synchronise links. Even at an individual level, 
many of a soldier’s handheld devices such as navigational aids, weapon sights 
or personal radios all include integrated space-based global navigation satellite 
system receivers.
4.7. SATCOM provides the bulk of beyond line of sight communication 
capabilities, often serving to extend the range of tactical communications 
systems, such as Falcon or Bowman, while providing connectivity to UK fixed 
telecommunications systems, thereby allowing command and control of land 
forces throughout the levels of operations. These include capabilities from the 
Skynet system, such as the Reacher series of deployable ground terminals 
accessing Skynet X-Band services, or commercial systems, such as Slingshot 
using Inmarsat L -Tac services. While hardened military SATCOM systems are 
widely used in any situation, commercial SATCOM systems are particularly 
prevalent where their benefits outweigh security concerns.
4.8. The land domain’s first recourse for ISR or environmental monitoring 
is invariably from space-based assets, albeit invariably from freely available 
commercial sources. These systems usually provide sufficient information to 
conduct an initial analysis and, if required, determine requests for information 
from higher specification military systems.
4.9. Space power is also critically dependent on land power for protection. 
Spacecraft are usually controlled from fixed ground infrastructure, which often 
requires land power to provide elements of its force protection.
86 For more information see Book of Reference (digital) (BRd) 4487 , The Fighting 
Instructions, Volume 2.6, ‘Information Warfare’, February 2016.
78
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

Integration with the air domain
4.10. Air-space integration is considered critical to successfully employing 
air power. The effectiveness and potency of aircraft operations is closely 
linked to the effectiveness of enabling space capabilities, such as PNT for 
aircraft and weapons, or voice and data communications. Satellite-enabled 
communications are essential for controlling and operating remotely piloted 
aircraft systems, such as Protector, beyond line of sight of their ground control 
stations. Equally, air power can be critical to space power, for example, by 
providing force protection through the air defence of space ground segment 
infrastructure. Effective air-space integration at the operational planning level 
can also provide opportunities to make use of complementary capabilities. 
For example, both the air and space domains offer significant ISR capabilities, 
which, if coordinated during an operation, can complement one another by 
ensuring there are no gaps in coverage or by enabling multi-source collection 
on a target. This allows fused intelligence to be generated, providing a better 
product to customers.
79
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power
Satellite launch operations can also be enabled by air assets

4.11. Satellite launch operations can also be enabled by air assets, such as 
the horizontal launch capabilities planned by the UK through LaunchUK, the 
UK Space Agency’s spaceflight programme. For some small satellites aimed 
into low Earth orbits, launching from an aircraft provides advantages over 
fixed sites. Horizontal launch facilities can be integrated with existing airport 
infrastructure, as long as range clearance procedures for launch are articulated 
and specialist infrastructure for fire and fuel is provided. This may be preferable 
to the construction of a dedicated vertical launch site. In addition, launching 
from an aircraft can allow greater flexibility with the launch trajectory of the 
satellite, an advantage for the UK considering its latitude. Terrestrial weather 
issues at a launch site can also be mitigated, providing conditions are suitable 
for the aircraft to take-off.
Integration with the cyber and electromagnetic domain
4.12. Space operations rely on the interaction of the ground, space and 
link segments, the latter residing almost completely within the cyber and 
electromagnetic domain. Command and control systems, data and information 
flows are all conducted through cyberspace via the electromagnetic 
environment (EME).
4.13. Access to the EME is fundamental to data exchange. The selection of 
frequency used for data transmission affects beamwidth and transmission 
range, thereby governing the accuracy and security of transmission of data to 
and from space vehicles. Frequency selection is further impacted by physical 
factors such as atmospheric interference (absorption and refraction), as well as 
the power to transmit data between space vehicles and the relevant segments. 
Careful consideration of the EME is therefore vital to successful space 
operations.
4.14. Space systems also rely on software and other elements of cyber 
hardware to generate and transmit the key PNT data and SATCOM systems 
relied on in the other operational domains. Secure communication systems 
enabled by encryption software also rely on these accurate timing sources. 
4.15. Space capabilities can also be used to assist other EMS operations, 
particularly though space ISR assets collecting signals intelligence. The access 
permitted to space ISR satellites allows overhead sensors to be positioned to 
detect even small changes in the frequencies produced by adversary ground 
activity.
80
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

4.16. As well as being a vital enabler, cyber and the EMS also provide vectors 
to target all three space power segments, both as part of an offensive space 
control strategy and, critically, as a threat to be guarded against. Control 
and data frequencies are vulnerable to being denied or degraded through 
interference or manipulation. For example, the low power signals transmitted 
from satellites can easily be jammed by local electromagnetic transmitters or 
manipulated through spoofing and rebroadcast systems. In addition, both the 
ground and space segments rely completely on cyber hardware and software to 
run, making them especially vulnerable to cyberattack. Integration between the 
space and cyber and electromagnetic domains is therefore vital to understand 
and mitigate threats, as well as to seek opportunities to influence an adversary.
Integration and the space domain
4.17. While it has been articulated how space can enable the other 
operational domains, it is also important to state that the other domains can 
enable or facilitate operations in space. This may be as simple as remote 
space-ground infrastructure being supplied and maintained through air or 
maritime supply routes, but this can be expanded to include offensive action 
where necessary. To enable theatre entry of a maritime force, for example, 
air power could be tasked to locate, identify and prosecute adversary space 
control capabilities or ground infrastructure processing space-based ISR data. 
This may also extend to the other operational domains should land or maritime 
strike be in range of the identified targets.87
Section 3 – Space and deterrence
4.18. Given space-enabled capabilities are essential for everyday life, not 
just for military operations, space has become an increasingly important 
operational domain, contested by state and non-state actors alike. Reliance 
on space can be thought of as a critical vulnerability and therefore control of 
space is sought by actors in the same way that they previously sought control 
of sea, land and air. Combined with this, threats to space assets, both direct 
and indirect are increasing, making it increasingly necessary to deter potential 
adversaries from taking action against them. 
87 Specific guidance with regards to space control and the targeting process can be 
found in Joint Service Publication 900, UK Full Spectrum Targeting Policy, Edition 5, Part 2, 
Annex G.
81
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

4.19. NATO defines deterrence as: the convincing of a potential aggressor 
that the consequences of coercion or armed conflict would outweigh the 
potential gains. This requires the maintenance of a credible military capability 
and strategy with the clear political will to act.88 There is no universal approach 
to deterrence: a viable deterrence strategy should be tailored to a particular 
actor or adversary. Accordingly, deterrence in, through or using space 
capabilities is not an independent activity but must form part of the wider 
strategy. It is a whole-of-government activity to which Defence contributes. 
The cornerstone of the UK’s deterrence posture remains enshrined in NATO 
through Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. NATO resilience is predicated on 
three pillars of activity: 
• layered resilience allowing aggression to be withstood;
• a mutually supporting integrated force to provide options to political 
leaders; and
• the ability to project stability through activities such as military 
dialogue, capacity building and operations.
88 NATOTerm.
The cornerstone of the UK’s deterrence posture remains enshrined in NATO through  
Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty
© Pavlo Lys / Shutterstock.com
82
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

4.20. The overall objective of deterrence applies to the space domain in the 
same way that it applies in the other operational domains. Space capabilities 
also enable other activities that contribute to deterrence. They provide 
data, in the form of products and services, that is crucial to maintaining 
activity within all the other operational domains. Space offers political choice 
through its ubiquity and pervasiveness but is not solely a military, or even 
state, endeavour, with non-state actors increasingly having a stake in the 
development and operation of capabilities. Partnerships with civil, industry, 
commercial and academic entities are therefore essential to increase 
resilience, understand the progress of technology in this area and develop 
further opportunities for deterrence.
83
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

Key points
• While space is an operational domain in its own right, it is most effective 
when integrated with other components of military power.
• The previous term ‘joint action’ is too narrow and too focused on the role 
of the military instrument rather than considering the wider audience.
• Space power supports the new UK integrated approach and the doctrinal 
tenets of integrated action, the manoeuvrist approach and mission 
command.
• Integrated action involves the orchestrated use of a full range of 
capabilities to change or maintain the attitude and behaviour of 
audiences.
• The manoeuvrist approach operates indirectly, pitting strength against 
identified vulnerabilities to undermine an adversary’s will and cohesion.
• Mission command allows a commander to articulate their intent but 
permits subordinates the initiative to achieve it within set boundaries.
• Demonstrating proven space power capabilities, or enabling capabilities 
in other operational domains, can contribute to overall deterrence.
• Deterrence must form part of a wider, whole-of-government, strategy.
• In the space domain, partnerships with civil, industry, commercial and 
academic entities are essential to increase resilience, exploit emerging 
technology and develop further opportunities for deterrence.
84
JDP 0-40
4
The employment of space power

Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
AJP  Allied joint publication
AP  Air publication
BEIS  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
BRd  book of reference (digital)
DA-ASAT direct ascent anti-satellite 
DCDC  Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
DOD  Department of Defense (US)
DSC  defensive space control
EME  electromagnetic environment
EMP  electromagnetic pulse
EMS  electromagnetic spectrum
ESA  European Space Agency
GEO  geosynchronous Earth orbit
GNSS  global navigation satellite system
GPS  Global Positioning System
HM   Her Majesty’s
IAMD  integrated air and missile defence
ISR  intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
ITU  International Telecommunication Union
JDP  joint doctrine publication
JFC  joint force commander
JFSCC  joint force space component commander
LEO  low Earth orbit
85
JDP 0-40
Lexicon

MOD  Ministry of Defence
MP  Member of Parliament
NATO  North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NAVWAR navigation warfare 
OSC  offensive space control
PFI  private finance initiative
PJHQ  Permanent Joint Headquarters
PNT  positioning, navigation and timing
RAF  Royal Air Force
SATCOM satellite communications
SDA  space domain awareness
SJFHQ  Standing Joint Force Headquarters
SSA  space situational awareness
SST  space surveillance and tracking
UK   United Kingdom
UK SpOC UK Space Operations Centre
UKStratCom Strategic Command
UN  United Nations
US  United States
USS  United States Ship
86
JDP 0-40
Lexicon

Section 2 – Terms and definitions
This section is divided into three parts. First, we list new definitions that will 
be added to JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm, followed 
by already endorsed terms and definitions. Finally, we list unendorsed 
terms and definitions that may be useful to the reader as reference for this 
publication only.
New definitions
space control  
The use of defensive and offensive capabilities to assure access and freedom 
of action in space. (JDP 0-40)
space domain awareness 
The provision of security-focused, decision-quality information that can be 
used to successfully mitigate adversary space effects while supporting the 
integration of allied space effects into multi-domain operations.  
Note: space domain awareness is derived from the fusion and aggregation 
of broader intelligence and knowledge of the terrestrial domains with space 
situational awareness and space surveillance and tracking data. (JDP 0-40)
space situational awareness  
The provision of sufficient understanding of the risks and hazards associated 
with domain congestion and complexity to enable safe and effective space 
operations. 
Note: space situational awareness supports both civil and military purposes. 
(JDP 0-40)
space surveillance and tracking 
The detection, tracking and identification of objects in or entering the space 
domain, using data from sensor observations and satellite operators, 
sufficient to deliver effective space situational awareness, space domain 
awareness and missile warning. 
Note: space surveillance and tracking is delivered for both civil and military 
purposes. (JDP 0-40)
87
JDP 0-40
Lexicon

Endorsed definitions
actor  
An individual, group or entity whose actions are affecting the attainment of the 
end state. (NATOTerm)
adversary  
An individual, group or entity whose intentions or interests are opposed to 
those of friendly parties and against which legal coercive political, military or 
civilian actions may be envisaged and conducted. (NATOTerm) 
audience  
An individual, group or entity whose interpretation of events and subsequent 
behaviour may affect the attainment of the end state.  
Note: The audience may consist of public, stakeholders and actors. 
(NATOTerm)
command 
The authority vested in a member of the armed forces for the direction, 
coordination, and control of military forces. (NATOTerm)
control 
The authority exercised by a commander over part of the activities of 
subordinate organizations, or other organizations not normally under their 
command, encompassing the responsibility for implementing orders or 
directives. (NATOTerm)
deterrence 
The convincing of a potential aggressor that the consequences of coercion 
or armed conflict would outweigh the potential gains. This requires the 
maintenance of a credible military capability and strategy with the clear political 
will to act. (NATOTerm)
information environment 
An environment comprised of the information itself,  the individuals, 
organizations and systems that receive, process and convey the information, 
and the cognitive, virtual and physical space in which this occurs. (NATOTerm)
88
JDP 0-40
Lexicon

intelligence 
The product resulting from the directed collection and processing of 
information regarding the environment and the capabilities and intentions of 
actors, in order to identify threats and offer opportunities for exploitation by 
decision-makers. (NATOTerm)
integrated air and missile defence 
All measures to contribute to deter any air and missile threat or to nullify or 
reduce the effectiveness of hostile air action in order to protect populations, 
territory and forces against the full spectrum of air and missile threats. 
(NATOTerm)
interoperability 
The ability to act together coherently, effectively and efficiently to achieve Allied 
tactical, operational and strategic objectives. (NATOTerm)
joint 
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and organizations in which 
elements of at least two services participate. (NATOTerm)
joint force 
A force composed of significant elements of two or more Services operating 
under a single commander authorised to exercise operational command or 
control. (JDP 0-01.1)
multinational 
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and organisations, in which 
forces or agencies of more than one nation participate. (NATOTerm)
reconnaissance 
A mission undertaken to obtain, by visual observation or other detection 
methods, information about the activities and resources of an adversary or 
to obtain data concerning the meteorological, hydrographical or geographic 
characteristics of a particular area. (NATOTerm)
space power 
Exerting influence in, from, or through space. (JDP 0-01.1)
surveillance 
The systematic observation across all domains, places, persons or objects by 
visual, electronic, photographic or other means. (NATOTerm)
89
JDP 0-40
Lexicon

Unendorsed definitions for use in this publication only
defensive space control  
Proactive measures conducted to protect space capabilities from attack, 
interference or unintentional hazards, using both active and passive measures.
geosynchronous Earth orbit  
An orbit synchronized to the Earth’s rotation, orbiting at the same rate at 
which the Earth rotates upon its axis. Satellites in this orbit have an altitude 
of approximately 23,000 miles above the Earth’s surface. Within this, a 
geostationary orbit is an orbit placed directly over the equator at zero 
inclination, so a satellite appears at a fixed point in the sky to observers on the 
ground and allows for constant line-of-sight observations within a very large 
footprint.
global navigation satellite system 
A constellation of satellites providing signals from space that transmit 
positioning and timing to receivers that then use this information to determine 
location.
Global Positioning System  
A satellite-based global navigation satellite system operated by the United 
States Department of Defense which provides military, civil and commercial 
users with precise positioning, navigation and timing.
Kármán Line 
A height approximately 100 kilometres above mean sea level above which 
the atmosphere becomes too thin for an aircraft to generate conventional lift 
without needing to exceed the speed required to achieve orbit.
low Earth orbit 
Orbits that are at a height of approximately 1,000 miles or less above the 
surface of the earth. The average time to orbit the Earth is approximately  
90–100 minutes resulting in a satellite in low Earth orbit being in view of a 
ground user or station for the short period when overhead.
medium Earth orbit 
An orbit with no formal altitude (roughly 1,000–2,000 miles above Earth’s 
surface) but is considered to include those orbits between low Earth orbit and 
geosynchronous orbit.
90
JDP 0-40
Lexicon

navigation warfare  
Deliberate defensive and offensive action to assure and prevent positioning, 
navigation, and timing information through coordinated employment of space, 
cyberspace, and electromagnetic warfare operations.  
(US Joint Publication 3-14)
offensive space control  
Operations that seek to disrupt, degrade, deny or destroy the space related 
capabilities and forces of an adversary.  
Note: such operations can be targeted against any of the segments of space 
activities using kinetic, non-kinetic or electromagnetic warfare techniques.
orbit 
Any path through space an object follows based on the pull of gravity.
positioning, navigation and timing 
The ability to determine location, time and relative direction accurately and 
precisely. 
space service support 
Operations that launch space assets and maintain and sustain them.
space support to operations 
Space operations which enable and enhance UK military capabilities, providing 
critical support to the combat effectiveness of the joint force.  
Note: it is divided into five core functions: intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance; positioning, navigation and timing; satellite communications; 
missile warning and tracking; and environmental monitoring.
91
JDP 0-40
Lexicon

Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2022Crown copyright 2022
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc


