Joint Doctrine Publication 0-30UK Air Power
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-30 
UK Air Power
Third Edition

[Page 2: No extractable text]

i
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-30
UK Air Power
Joint Doctrine Publication 0-30 (JDP 0-30) (3rd Edition),  
dated September 2022, is promulgated as directed 
by the Chiefs of Staff
Head Doctrine
Conditions of release
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) Crown copyright. Material 
and information contained in this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
a retrieval system and transmitted for UK government and MOD use only, 
except where authority for use by other organisations or individuals has been 
authorised by a Patent Officer of the Defence Intellectual Property Rights. 

Authorisation
The Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre (DCDC) is responsible for 
publishing strategic trends, joint concepts and doctrine. If you wish to quote 
our publications as reference material in other work, you should confirm with 
our editors whether the particular publication and amendment state remains 
authoritative. We welcome your comments on factual accuracy or amendment 
proposals. Please contact us via email at: DCDC-DocEds@mod.gov.uk
Copyright
This publication is UK Ministry of Defence © Crown copyright (2022) including 
all images (unless otherwise stated). Front cover © Rich Cooper/COAP
If contacting Defence Intellectual Property Rights for authority to release 
outside of the UK government and MOD, the Patent Officer should be 
informed of any third party copyright within the publication.
Crown copyright and Merchandise Licensing, Defence Intellectual Property 
Rights, Central Legal Services, MOD Abbeywood South, Poplar 2 #2214, 
Bristol, BS34 8JH. Email: DIPR-CC@mod.gov.uk
Distribution
All DCDC publications can be demanded from the LCSLS Headquarters and 
Operations Centre. 
LCSLS Help Desk: 01869 256197 M ilitary Network: 94240 2197
Our publications are available to view and download on defnet at:  
https://modgovuk.sharepoint.com/sites/IntranetUKStratCom/SitePages/
development-concepts-and-doctrine-centre-dcdc.aspx
This publication is also available on the Internet at: www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc
ii
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 

iii
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Foreword
The last decade has seen dramatic technological change set against a 
backdrop of significant geopolitical challenge in a world in which information 
and data have transformed the way we interact. Traditional distinctions 
between peace and war have become dangerously blurred and the 
competitive nature of international relations in this information age requires 
us to evaluate rapidly and respond decisively to events. Air power, with its 
ability to influence audiences through both hard and soft power, supports that 
requirement unequivocally and offers flexible, timely, scalable, and responsive 
options to the UK government in support of national security objectives. 
It is critical that those charged with employing and directing the use of air 
power do so from a position of knowledge and common understanding. 
Doctrine provides us with an agreed upon and operationally relevant body of 
best practices, principles and beliefs that articulates how we fight today. It is 
our collective wisdom drawn at considerable cost from operations, training, 
and experimentation. It must not be allowed to become dogma. 
The UK maintains highly credible air power but cannot provide the full breadth 
of air power capabilities and enablers to generate, coordinate and sustain the 
mass required to conduct high-intensity operations alone. For that reason, we 
must always be innovative in our development and application of air power, 
and the way we integrate it across all operational domains and with our 
international allies and partners. 
While the enduring principles of air power remain constant, maintaining 
relevance in a fast-changing world remains key. Our air power doctrine has to 
evolve continually to meet the challenges of the current geopolitical context 
and the increasingly complex joint and combined operating environment. 
This latest edition of JDP 0-30, UK Air Power, should be considered essential 
reading for a wide audience across Defence, and desirable reading for our 
partners across government – I commend it to you. 
Air Chief Marshal Sir Mike Wigston KCB CBE ADC 
Chief of the Air Staff


iv
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 

v
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Preface
 
Purpose
1.   Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-30, UK Air Power is the UK’s keystone 
air domain doctrine publication. Whilst JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine 
provides the broad principles and philosophy underpinning the use of UK 
Armed Forces, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO’s) Allied 
Joint Publication (AJP)-3.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Air and Space Operations  
focuses on the application of NATO air power, JDP 0-30 is focused specifically 
on UK air power. It brings together higher-level doctrine, government policy 
and enduring air power knowledge and experience to provide a basis for 
understanding the utility of the air domain. JDP 0-30 highlights the strengths 
and discusses the limitations of air power and considers those factors which, 
in broad terms, enable the effective employment of air power. It also explores 
its relationship with the other operational domains and its interdependence 
with the other elements of national and military power, as well as with 
multinational and private sector partners.
Context
2. This third edition of JDP 0-30 continues the joint theme that runs 
through the previous editions, whilst reflecting the UK’s adoption of an 
integrated approach to operations. Previous versions of JDP 0-30 have 
encompassed both air power and space power. For this version, due to the 
increasing maturity of the space domain enterprise across UK Defence, it 
has been decided to split air power and space power into separate doctrine 
publications.1
Audience
3. This third edition of JDP 0-30 is a simple and concise explanation of air 
power, which seeks to inform a wide audience. It is designed to highlight the 
strategic utility of air power and its contribution to national power. JDP 0-30 
should be of value to all departments of the Ministry of Defence (MOD), joint 
commanders and staffs at all levels, the single Services, the broader defence 
community and other government departments, as well as partners and allies 
of the UK.
1 For more information on space power, see JDP 0-40,  UK Space Power.

vi
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
Structure
4. JDP 0-30 is divided into four chapters with a supporting lexicon. An outline 
of what is covered in these chapters is detailed below.
a. Chapter 1 – An introduction to air power. This chapter provides 
an overview of the basics of air power and introduces air capabilities. It 
discusses influence and power from the air and places air power into a 
strategic context.
b. Chapter 2 – The roles of air power. This chapter discusses in detail 
the enduring and fundamental roles of air power. It also introduces the 
key and critical enablers of electromagnetic warfare and command and 
control. 
c. Chapter 3 – Command and control. This chapter provides more 
detail on the command and control of air power. This includes discussing 
the principles of command and control, UK capabilities and the planning 
and tasking of air power.
d. Chapter 4 – The employment of air power. This chapter considers 
the application of UK air power in the context of joint operations, 
cross-g overnment integration and integrated action. It provides an 
overview of air power enablers and outlines air power’s utility.
Linkages
5. JDP 0-30, UK Air Power is the keystone air domain doctrine publication 
within the joint doctrine architecture, sitting below JDP 0-01, UK Defence 
Doctrine and alongside other joint domain-centric doctrine: JDP 0-10, UK 
Maritime Power; JDP 0-20, UK Land Power; JDP 0-40, UK Space Power; and 
JDP 0-50, UK Defence Cyber and Electromagnetic Doctrine . It reflects current 
UK government and MOD policy, in particular the 2021 Global Britain in a 
competitive age: The Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development 
and Foreign Policy. JDP 0-30 is coherent with AJP-3.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for 
Air and Space Operations. Whilst reflecting the joint context, it is also coherent 
with the Royal Air Force’s capstone doctrine, Air Publication (AP) 3002, Air and 
Space Warfare, which provides more detail of air and space power.

vii
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Contents
Foreword  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii
Preface  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Chapter 1 – An introduction to air power  . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 – The roles of air power   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Chapter 3 – Command and control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Chapter 4 – The employment of air power   . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Lexicon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95

[Page 10: No extractable text]

1
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Chapter 1
This chapter provides an overview of UK air power, outlining 
its enduring utility in an era of persistent and complex 
competition. It introduces the attributes and roles, and 
provides a definition of UK air power. The chapter further 
provides a brief introduction to air capabilities, discusses 
influence and power from the air, and concludes by placing 
air power into context. 
Section 1 – The basics of air power .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
Section 2 – Air capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
Section 3 – Influence and power from the air  . . . . .  14
Section 4 – Air power in context . . . . . . . . . . . .  18

”
“The fundamental purpose of 
military air power is achieving 
mastery of the air.
 
Air Publication 3002, Air and Space Warfare 
 
2
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

Chapter 1
An introduction to air 
power
Section 1 – The basics of air power
1.1. The UK government uses four instruments of power in pursuit of national 
policy goals; these are the diplomatic, information, military and economic 
instruments.1 The military instrument of national power spans the operational 
domains2 of maritime, land, air, space, and cyber and electromagnetic. 
Since its inception, air power has made a vital contribution to the UK military 
instrument, helping to maintain the freedom of the nation and to project 
national influence when called upon.
1.2. In the UK, the Royal Air Force (RAF) has the conceptual lead for 
warfare across the air domain, thus the structure of the UK Armed Forces 
predominantly focuses the generation and employment of air power around 
the RAF. However, the Fleet Air Arm of the Royal Navy and the Army Air Corps 
and other aviation elements of the British Army also contribute significantly to 
the delivery of UK air power.
Air power is defined as:
The ability to use air capabilities in and from the air, to influence the 
behaviour of actors and the course of events.3
1.3. By the end of World War 1, the impact of air power was beginning to 
be felt across all forms of warfare. The enduring characteristics of height, 
speed and reach had been established and the fundamental roles of air 
power codified. By World War 2, no military activity could overlook the 
significance of air power; when properly targeted and coordinated, it proved 
influential – often decisive – in all theatres of the war. During and after World 
1 S ee Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine for a full explanation of 
national power, national security, the national interest and national strategy.
2 A n operational domain is defined as: a specified sphere of capabilities and activities 
that can be applied within an engagement space . NATOTerm.
3 J DP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm.
3
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power
A –Z

War 2, the technological development of air power accelerated dramatically, 
with investment in airframe, engine, sensor and weapon technologies, which 
enabled operational and tactical developments across all operational domains. 
Air power is now recognised as an extremely responsive and scalable element 
of the military instrument of national power.
The characteristics of air power
1.4. At the heart of air power are its characteristics. The hard-earned 
experience of over a century of military air power has confirmed these to be: 
height, speed and reach. 
a. Height enables the observation, and delivery, of activities in the land 
and maritime environments. Three-dimensional manoeuvre, facilitated by 
height, is also an important survivability factor. 
b. Speed enables the rapid and responsive projection of power, 
which permits missions to be completed quickly, generating tempo and 
offering the potential to exploit time. At the tactical level, high speed flight 
reduces exposure to hostile fire and increases survivability, whilst the 
ability to fly at low speed allows extended loiter time.
c. Reach enables audiences, actors, adversaries and enemies to be 
influenced, regardless of their location. Whilst 70% of the world’s surface 
is covered by water, 100% of it is covered by air. This provides air power 
with unrivalled reach, usually unimpeded by terrain, enabling distant 
or isolated targets to be prosecuted and potential restrictions to be 
circumvented.
1.5. While height, speed and reach represent fundamental air power 
characteristics in their own right, they also act together synergistically to 
produce additional characteristics. These additional characteristics are: agility, 
ubiquity4 and concentration. 
a. Agility. Agility is a blend of responsiveness, adaptability, flexibility 
and resilience. Air power is inherently agile, a characteristic amplified 
by the multi-role capability of many platforms. Agility permits aircraft 
to move quickly and decisively between the strategic, operational 
and tactical levels of operations, and to move across and between 
4 U biquity is defined as: present, appearing, or found everywhere. Concise Oxford 
English Dictionary  (COED).
4
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

operational theatres, sometimes during the same mission, and to act as 
a manoeuvre force in its own right.
b. Ubiquity. Height, speed and reach, combined with the agility of 
air capabilities, provide air power with ubiquity. This is because threats 
can be posed or countered across a wide area, with significantly fewer 
constraints than exist in the land and maritime environments. 
c. Concentration. Speed, reach and agility allow air power to 
concentrate military force in time and space, when and where it is 
required. Precision weaponry means that effects can be concentrated 
without the requirement for combat mass. The psychological and 
physical shock imposed by the concentration of effects is often crucial in 
achieving successful operational outcomes.
1.6. In combination, air power’s characteristics enable the delivery of 
significant combat power. Speed, reach and height, coupled with modern 
sensor technology, precision weaponry and, for a number of aircraft, the 
ability to remain aloft for extended periods, provide the capability to shape 
and influence the operational environment. Moreover, the agility and ubiquity 
of air power mean that it can be used to revisit points of interest within short 
response times or cover multiple joint operations areas in one sortie, thereby 
delivering an additional degree of persistence. Equally, air power can be used 
fleetingly and with a very small footprint to offer covertness, discretion and 
deniability, should these be required.
5
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power
Atlas C-1 (A400M) takes off from RAF Akrotiri

1.7. These characteristics mean that air power is ideally suited to create 
effects across the entire spectrum of operations. It can, for example: 
• enable freedom of movement; 
• deliver humanitarian aid; 
• deliver deliberate interventions through attack operations; 
• reassure allies; and 
• deny and/or deter adversary activity.
The air environment
1.8. The air environment is an unforgiving one and, thus, aircraft are designed 
to meet the challenges of operating at a variety of altitudes, temperature 
extremes and speed ranges. The physics and aerodynamic principles 
associated with the air environment also complicate the design process for 
aircraft.
1.9. Most crewed aircraft are able to withstand or avoid the extreme weather 
that can occur in the air, but as the majority of uncrewed aircraft tend, 
currently, to be lighter, slower and less robust than their crewed counterparts 
they can be more susceptible to such conditions. The laws of physics dictate 
that the performance of some aircraft, sensors and weapon systems are 
also adversely affected by extremes of poor weather. However, the versatility 
offered by an array of sensors across the electromagnetic and acoustic 
spectra provides an acceptable level of resilience and enables agility.
6
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power
Voyager KC Mk2, in VIP livery, refuelling F-35B Lightnings and a Typhoon FGR4

Limitations of air power
1.10. Air power does have its limitations. But, like its strengths, these are 
relative rather than absolute and need to be understood in that context. Some 
of the limitations are explored below.
a. Impermanence. Aircraft cannot yet stay airborne indefinitely, 
although some uncrewed platforms are now capable of long  
loiter/mission times. Although the use of air-to-air refuelling can extend 
the range and endurance of aircraft, no means have yet been found 
to rearm or service an aircraft in flight. To that extent, air power is 
an impermanent form of military force; the influence it creates may 
be transient and activities may have to be repeated to sustain the 
desired degree of influence or effect. Whilst multiple aircraft cycling 
through the same task can provide a degree of permanence, in certain 
circumstances impermanence may be an advantage; for example, it 
may avert the potential military and political liabilities that result from an 
extended land-based presence in a foreign country.
b. Limited payload. The payloads that can be carried by aircraft may 
be limited in comparison with ships or land vehicles. However, air power 
trades off load-carrying capability against speed and reach, as well as 
the ability to access areas that surface forces cannot physically access. 
A small payload delivered quickly may be of far more value in influencing 
a critical situation than a larger one deployed much later. Air power 
often provides the only means of creating effects at a point of crisis 
rapidly enough to meet policy objectives.5 
c. Fragility. Structurally, aircraft are highly stressed and built to be 
as light as practicable, carrying little or no armour protection; thus, 
relatively low levels of battle damage may have a catastrophic effect. 
However, structural fragility must not be confused with vulnerability 
in the air, where survivability is achieved by the exploitation of speed, 
height and manoeuvrability. 
d. Cost. Many military aircraft use cutting-edge technology, which, 
inevitably, comes at significant financial cost. This cost must be 
balanced against the multiple and adaptive capabilities delivered; 
indeed, low-cost uncrewed aircraft may offer an expendable capability. 
5 T hese effects could be delivering personnel, equipment or humanitarian aid, or 
dropping munitions.
7
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power

Moreover, air power can, in certain situations, offer alternative policy 
options to the large-scale commitment of land forces, with the heavy 
financial and human consequences that this frequently entails.
e. Basing and overflight. All forms of military power depend on 
basing, support and protection; aircraft are no exception. Air power’s 
requirements for access, basing and overflight rights are often cited as 
a weakness; however, the UK uses its diplomatic influence to mitigate 
this weakness. Consequently, gaining the support of allies, partners and 
friendly nations has rarely proved to be a significant problem. The use 
of carrier-enabled power projection also mitigates the reliance on land 
basing of some air assets.
f. Weather. Historically, air power was constrained by night and poor 
weather. Poor weather may still create some difficulties, but modern 
technology means that the majority of military aircraft can now operate 
in all light conditions, day and night, regardless of weather conditions. 
Indeed, advanced navigation equipment, sensors, targeting systems 
and weaponry mean that night and poor weather may give UK air power 
distinct advantages when facing an adversary lacking these capabilities.6 
Section 2 – Air capabilities
1.11. Air capabilities naturally centre on aircraft, which the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization (NATO) defines as: any machine that can derive support 
in the atmosphere from the reactions of the air other than the reactions of the 
air against the earth’s surface.7 This definition therefore includes fixed-wing, 
rotary wing and tilt-rotor aircraft, both crewed and uncrewed. Whilst the overall 
number of UK military aircraft has decreased over the past two decades, the 
capabilities of individual aircraft types have developed significantly, notably 
in regard to enhanced precision attack capabilities, intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance (ISR) sensors, low-observable technology and data link 
connectivity. Consequently, more aircraft types are now capable of conducting 
multiple air power roles during a sortie, often simultaneously. This enhances 
the inherent flexibility of air power and offers the operational commander a 
tailored response to evolving circumstances and an array of capabilities that 
can rapidly transition between tasks.
6 T his paragraph refers to terrestrial weather, for the impact of space weather on air 
operations see JDP 0-40, UK Space Power.
7 NATOTerm.
8
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

Crewed aircraft  
1.12. Crewed aircraft continue to provide the bulk of UK air power capabilities. 
Whilst uncrewed aircraft technology continues to develop at a rapid pace, 
the presence of an on board crew currently remains essential to successfully 
execute the majority of core air missions; this is especially the case within a 
contested environment where command and control will be limited, high energy 
combat manoeuvring may be necessary or close tactical coordination between 
a large number of aircraft may be required to achieve the necessary combat 
mass. Below the threshold of armed conflict, the use of crewed aircraft in the 
air mobility role ensures regulatory requirements concerning passenger safety 
are met whilst larger ISR aircraft such as the UK’s RC-135 Joint Rivet carry a 
multidiscipline crew able to exploit the information gathered in real time. Whilst 
crewed aircraft carry with them an inherent risk to the crew that cannot be 
eliminated, particularly within high-threat environments, currently they represent 
the most flexible method of delivering decentralised execution of air tasks across 
the broadest set of probable scenarios.
1.13. Crewed combat aircraft are generally categorised according to 
their ‘generation’, which broadly reflects their capabilities. A generational 
shift in combat aircraft occurs when a technological innovation cannot be 
incorporated into an existing aircraft through upgrades and retrofits. There are 
9
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power
Puma HC2 formation as part of celebrations marking 50 years of Puma service  
with the RAF

currently five broadly accepted generations, although most NATO air forces are 
now equipped with fourth and fifth generation aircraft.
a. Fourth generation. Fourth generation aircraft are those designed 
to bridge the gap between the developments of the 1960s and 1970s 
and those entering service after 2000. Key characteristics include: high 
manoeuvrability and supersonic dash performance; fly-by-wire controls; 
mechanically scanned radar; and a look-down, shoot-down air-to-air 
capability. There are over 46 individual types of fourth generation aircraft 
in the world, including the RAF’s Typhoon aircraft.8   
b. Fifth generation. Fifth generation aircraft combine new 
developments such as thrust vectoring, composite materials, 
supercruise (the ability to cruise at supersonic speeds efficiently), 
low-o bservable technology, advanced electronically scanned radars 
and sensors, and integrated avionics to greatly improve crew situational 
awareness. There are only five operational fifth generation aircraft types 
in the world, including the UK’s F-35B Lightning II. 
Uncrewed aircraft
1.14. There is, after over a century of crewed flight, a broad understanding 
of the variety, operation and regulation of crewed aircraft; however, the 
past couple of decades have seen an almost exponential increase in the 
development, capability and use of uncrewed aircraft. Whilst this publication 
seeks to reflect the normalisation of the operation of uncrewed aircraft, there 
are some areas in which uncrewed aircraft differ from crewed that merit 
inclusion. These areas are classification, terminology and legal aspects, which 
are discussed below.
1.15. Due to the lack of a requirement to accommodate a human being, 
uncrewed aircraft can be significantly smaller than crewed aircraft, thus 
the range of sizes can be greater than that of crewed aircraft. This led to a 
requirement to categorise uncrewed aircraft to provide a reference tool for the 
procurement, regulation and operation of them. The UK uses both NATO9 and 
UK Military Aviation Authority10 classifications of uncrewed aircraft.11
8 A lthough designed as a fourth generation aircraft, the Typhoon has been enhanced 
over recent years with upgrades to avionics and weapons and is now referred to as a 
4.5 generation aircraft.
9 AJP-3.3, Allied Joint Doctrine for Air and Space Operations , Edition B, Version 1, 
Figure 4.2.
10 M ilitary Aviation Authority Regulatory Article 1600.
11 N ATO uses the terms ‘unmanned aircraft’ and ‘unmanned aircraft system’.
10
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

Terminology relating to uncrewed aircraft
The UK uses the following definitions. The UK definitions are new but aligned 
as closely as possible with the NATO Agreed definitions. 
uncrewed aircraft 
An aircraft that does not carry a human operator and is operated remotely using 
varying levels of automated functions. 
Notes 1. Uncrewed aircraft can be expendable or recoverable. 
           2. Uncrewed aircraft may carry a lethal or non-lethal payload. 
           3. Cruise missiles are not considered uncrewed aircraft.  
(Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-01.1)
uncrewed aircraft system 
A system whose components include the uncrewed aircraft, the supporting 
network and all equipment and personnel necessary to control the uncrewed 
aircraft. (JDP 0-01.1)
remotely piloted aircraft 
An uncrewed aircraft that is controlled from a remote pilot station by a pilot who 
has been trained and certified to the same standards as a pilot of a crewed 
aircraft. (JDP 0-01.1)
remotely piloted aircraft system 
A remotely piloted aircraft, its associated remote pilot station(s), the required 
command and control links and any other components as specified in the type 
design. (NATOTerm)
The terms automated and autonomous are often used and discussed in relation to 
uncrewed aircraft, therefore it is important to understand these terms and how they 
relate to uncrewed aircraft systems. The NATO Agreed definitions are as follows.
automated 
Pertaining to a system that, in response to inputs, follows a predetermined set of 
rules to provide a predictable outcome. (NATOTerm)
autonomous 
Pertaining to a system that decides and acts to accomplish desired goals, within 
defined parameters, based on acquired knowledge and an evolving situational 
awareness, following an optimal but potentially unpredictable course of action. 
(NATOTerm)
11
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power
A –Z

1.16. Whilst definitions can vary, the key difference is that an automated 
system is capable of carrying out complicated tasks but is incapable of 
complex decision-making, whereas an autonomous system is capable of 
deciding a course of action without depending on human oversight and 
control. There is no doubt that automated systems are becoming more 
complex and sophisticated.
1.17. There is much public and academic debate around the definitions 
of automated and autonomous when applied to weapons systems. Lethal 
autonomous weapons systems are the subject of discussion at the United 
Nations (UN) under the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons; 
however, there is no international agreement over the definitions or 
characteristics of these systems.
1.18. Fully autonomous weapons systems – systems with no human 
involvement at all – currently do not exist. Due to the inherent unpredictability 
of a fully automated system’s decision-making, it is unlikely that rational 
commanders and politicians will want to employ such systems as this 
unpredictability could impede and limit their decision-making across the levels 
of operations. The growing recognition that narratives and information are of 
increasing importance further underlines this reluctance to hand control of 
lethal force to fully autonomous systems – no matter how sophisticated they 
may become. 
1.19. All UK uncrewed aircraft and associated systems are automated 
to varying degrees, but none of them are fully autonomous. The UK does 
not possess armed autonomous aircraft systems, and has no intention of 
developing them. The UK government’s policy is clear that the operation of 
UK weapons will always be under human control as an absolute guarantee 
of human oversight, authority and accountability. Whilst weapon systems 
may operate in automatic modes, there is always a person involved in setting 
appropriate parameters.
12
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

Legal, moral and ethical aspects of uncrewed aircraft 
operations
1.20. Arguments against using uncrewed aircraft are centred on concerns 
that they will be misused or used illegally. Such concerns are not unique to 
uncrewed air systems. All such systems are subject to the same requirement 
for legal review12 before their entry into service and any use of armed force by 
such systems will always be consistent with the applicable law; for example, 
the law of armed conflict that applies in the context of an armed conflict. All 
missions, including attack, are conducted under exactly the same rules of 
engagement and legal authority as crewed missions.
1.21. There are frequently voiced concerns about using military uncrewed 
aircraft for attack missions, specifically focusing on the morality and ethics of 
a human not being present in the platform that is creating a destructive and 
potentially lethal effect. These concerns are that the range and relative safety 
of the remote operators will in some way reduce their awareness, empathy, 
humanity and observance of legal and political constraints. However, it has 
been noted that removing the physical and mental challenges of crewed flight, 
particularly the high workload associated with single-seat aircraft, increases 
the operator’s capacity to make informed decisions. Operators have access to 
12 I n accordance with Article 36 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions.
13
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power
SkyGuardian (MQ-9B), due to enter RAF service in 2024 as the Protector RG Mk1,  
during a visit to its future operating base at RAF Waddington

legal and political advisers during armed missions to ensure that their activities 
comply with the law of armed conflict, published rules of engagement and with 
policy and political intent. 
1.22. Uncrewed aircraft increase the utility of air power. This is because they 
expand the range of options available for action due to the reduced risk to 
personnel compared to the personnel survivability concerns when employing a 
crewed aircraft in a high threat environment.
Section 3 – Influence and power from 
the air
1.23. Political, military and economic credibility, together with a coherent 
diplomatic agenda, play a large part in the UK’s ability to influence.13 Power is 
the capacity to influence the behaviour of people or the course of events and it 
underpins the ability to influence. The UK applies power across the instruments 
of national power to achieve policy goals by using smart power, which is a 
blend of ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ power. These are described below. 
a. Hard power. Hard power employs military capability and economic 
strength to achieve the desired behaviours of states, groups or 
individuals, or to directly change the course of events. Those using hard 
power seek to coerce opponents to adopt a course of action that they 
would not otherwise choose themselves. The military and economic 
instruments are important sources of hard power and deterrence, 
supported by the diplomatic and information instruments. The difference 
between deterrence and coercion is important. Both are aspects of 
hard power but deterrence aims to dissuade a course of action whilst 
coercion aims to encourage a course of action. An air power contribution 
to hard power activity could be the delivery of a precision-g uided 
weapon by a combat aircraft employed in the attack role.
13 J DP 04, Understanding and Decision-making .
The key to understanding air power is recognising its ability to influence 
a wide variety of audiences, through both hard and soft power.
“
14
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

b. Soft power. Soft power is the ability to persuade or encourage 
others to adopt an alternative approach primarily through cultural and 
ideological means or by encouraging emulation. Soft power is generally 
slower and more difficult to employ in a targeted way. Much soft power 
lies outside a democratic government’s control, presenting a challenge 
to its generation. Therefore, applying soft power demands: investment 
over time; clear, consistent communication strategies and measures 
of effectiveness; and a developed understanding of the intended 
audience and their societal codes, beliefs and cultures. Diplomatic and 
informational capabilities underpin the effectiveness of soft power. Soft 
power is important to the UK. The UK’s soft power, the size and depth 
of its global connections and the trust we enjoy, has a direct impact 
on our prosperity and security. The military is generally considered the 
quintessential instrument of hard power, but it has important soft power 
uses, for instance, air power can contribute to soft power activities 
through, among other things, delivering training to another nation as 
part of Defence engagement or participating in multinational exercises.
1.24. A variety of military options can be used to influence the behaviour 
of audiences and the course of events, and although air power can be used 
independently, it primarily seeks to create effects and exert an influence in other 
operational domains. It is therefore inherently integrated and manoeuvrist14 
across all levels of operations, and the desired effects must be synchronised 
across the operational domains, not just within the air domain. Similarly, 
operations in the maritime, land, space, and cyber and electromagnetic 
domains all have the ability to influence events in the air domain.
Political aspects
1.25. Air power offers policymakers an agile, timely and focused capability 
that can be highly effective in resolving or averting a developing crisis. It 
can also potentially negate the requirement to deploy a larger force over a 
broader timescale by land or sea. By minimising or removing the requirement 
for land forces, air power can make it easier to commit militarily in politically 
challenging circumstances. Its speed, mobility and precision combine to make 
it an attractive element of the military instrument of national power. Speed is a 
particularly attractive feature because it enables air power to rapidly accomplish 
political and military objectives, for example, by striking at an adversary’s 
vulnerabilities or by delivering humanitarian aid in support of an ally.
14 T he three tenets of UK military doctrine are: integrated action, the manoeuvrist 
approach and mission command. JDP 0-01, UK Defence Doctrine , 6th Edition.
15
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power

Air support to humanitarian relief activity – Operation 
Ruman
Operation Ruman was the UK’s military contribution to the international 
relief effort in the Caribbean Islands, which were left devastated by 
Hurricane Irma in 2017 . RAF Voyager, C-17 and A-400M aircraft departed 
the UK within hours of the incident to provide immediate relief to people 
who had seen their homes destroyed. They carried over 300 UK military 
personnel, including 200 Royal Marines, engineers and specialist 
personnel from all three Services. Urgently needed medical supplies, 
emergency shelter kits, rations and clean water were also flown to the 
area. Puma helicopters were transported to the region to allow hub and 
spoke operations to be conducted from the UK joint task force base in 
Barbados. In addition, embarked in Royal Fleet Auxiliary Mounts Bay was a 
Royal Navy Wildcat helicopter, which was used to conduct reconnaissance 
flights of the area and more air power arrived within days, including RAF 
Chinooks, on board HMS Ocean. As well as satisfying the humane and 
moral requirement to help those in need, Operation Ruman signalled the 
UK’s support for the region through a rapid response that was largely 
enabled by air power.
16
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

1.26. Air power’s agility means the scale and scope of operations can be 
rapidly escalated or de-escalated in response to a change in political guidance 
or political strategic objectives, from delivering humanitarian aid at one end of 
the spectrum to full-scale warfighting at the other.15 It can also be an effective 
means of achieving objectives by avoiding the military and political liabilities 
that can arise from an extended land-based presence in a foreign country. 
Consequently, since the end of the Cold War, air power has played a major 
role in state responses to conflict.
Legal aspects
1.27 . Each nation state has sovereignty over the airspace above their territory.16 
Therefore, although the attributes of air power provide it with the theoretical 
ability to reach any point on Earth, the permission of sovereign territories is 
required to operate within their airspace. Exceptions to this requirement do 
exist, for example, if measures involving armed force are permitted by a UN 
Security Council resolution or when acting in self-defence in accordance with 
Article 51 of the UN Charter. The UK will always operate in accordance with its 
legal obligations, including the law of armed conflict when applicable.17
1.28. All UK military aircraft are operated in accordance with domestic and 
international law. As detailed above, uncrewed aircraft system missions will be 
planned and conducted in accordance with the same rules of engagement 
and other legal requirements as applies to crewed aircraft. 
Economic aspects
1.29. Freedom of navigation in the air environment enables international trade 
and helps to secure international safety. As our national security depends on 
our economic security, the ability to influence and shape what happens in the 
air environment is of fundamental importance to not only our national security 
but also our continued prosperity. As an island nation, the UK relies on its air 
lines of communication for this prosperity, just as it does its sea and land lines 
of communication. The air environment must therefore be secured to allow 
the freedom of movement, which bolsters the economy and supports the 
prosperity of the nation.
15 T he mere deployment of combat aircraft to a location in close proximity to a potential 
adversary can achieve influence, such as deterrence.
16 A s recognised under Article 1 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation (Chicago 
Convention) 1944.
17 Se e Joint Service Publication 383, Joint Service Manual of the Law of Armed Conflict 
and the Attorney General’s speech at the International Institute for Strategic Studies,  
11 January 2017.
17
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power

1.30. Although this publication focuses on the military elements of air power, 
there are aspects of broader UK air power that bolster the UK economy, 
and ultimately reinforce national security. These include, for example: UK 
international airports, airlines and freight carriers; the ability to control and 
support international air traffic through the existence of the Civil Aviation 
Authority and civilian air traffic control; and the domestic aircraft industry.
Section 4 – Air power in context
The strategic context
1.31. The strategic context within which UK air power is employed is 
unstable, complex and uncertain. It is characterised by a continuum of 
competition between an increasingly wide range of actors, both state and 
non-s tate, which has blurred the traditional distinctions between war and 
peace.
18
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power
A Reaper (MQ-9A) prepares for take off

1.32. It is within this uncertain, changeable global socio-economic context 
that air power offers flexible, timely, scalable and responsive options to the 
UK government in support of national security objectives. It contributes to a 
wide variety of tasks, ranging from high-end warfighting, through to deterrence 
and Defence engagement. Within these tasks sit a broad range of activities, 
including counterterrorism, delivering humanitarian assistance and providing 
military aid to the civil authorities. 
1.33. The increasing proliferation of commercially available technology has 
the potential to increase the capability and effectiveness of our adversaries. 
Secure communications, surveillance systems and uncrewed aircraft are now 
more affordable and can be easily acquired and adapted to perform a variety 
of functions, including kinetic attacks.
1.34. Surface-to-air missile technology has advanced rapidly and the 
proliferation of such systems is spreading, particularly those developed in 
Russia and China. Some have significant lethal engagement ranges and can 
travel at hypersonic speeds, and they are therefore able to threaten aircraft 
and bases previously viewed as being beyond the range of adversaries. Such 
capabilities offer potential adversaries the option to adopt anti-access and 
area denial strategies, which could have a significant negative impact on the 
ability of the UK and its allies and partners to gain control of the air. We must 
continue to develop counters to such threats across all operational domains to 
ensure control of the air and freedom of manoeuvre. 
1.35. Being agile, adaptable and capable, UK air power has significant utility 
as it can offer a tailored response to evolving circumstances and an array of 
capabilities that can rapidly transition between tasks. To fulfil these tasks, UK 
air capabilities are held at the appropriate readiness to be applied at the right 
time and place, both at home and overseas.
1.36. Air power is truly global in nature because it theoretically enables 
access to any point on Earth, be it over land or sea. Air power thus has 
strategic agility as it can hold multiple regions, theatres and operations at risk 
from a single location because of its reach and speed. To maximise the utility 
of air power, the key aspects of the air domain, the surrounding context and 
the contemporary operating environment must all be clearly understood.
19
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power

Global alliances and partnerships
1.37. The globalised nature of international security encourages the UK 
to form alliances and partnerships, which help ensure security and protect 
national interests. Such relationships are increasingly important because the 
complex nature of potential threats often requires a multifaceted response. 
Interoperability between air forces also enhances alliances and coalitions 
by generating greater combat mass, resilience and access to an array of 
capabilities. For the UK, NATO is our principal alliance.
Defence engagement
1.38. The UK’s dependence on multinational cooperation means it must take 
every opportunity to promote interoperability and engage with a broad range 
of potential partners, regardless of their level of technological sophistication or 
capability. As part of an integrated, cross-government approach to Defence 
engagement,18 both the RAF and the air arms of the other single Services 
regularly conduct multinational training and exercises, and participate in 
overseas exchange and Defence attaché programmes. 
18 S ee Joint Doctrine Note 1/15, Defence Engagement  for more detail.
20
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power
The Red Arrows fly over the Golden Gate Bridge, San Francisco, during their  
North American Tour 2019

1.39. Defence engagement also contributes to the prosperity agenda through 
support to sales campaigns. Examples of this are the overseas tours by the 
RAF Aerobatic Team, the Red Arrows, which have generated significant inward 
investment to the UK,19 and the creation of the joint RAF/Qatar Emiri Air Force 
Typhoon and Hawk squadrons.
UK Security, Defence, Development and Foreign Policy 
Strategic Framework
1.40. The Defence contribution to the four overarching objectives of the 
Strategic Framework is set out in the 2021 Global Britain in a competitive age: 
Integrated Review of Security, Defence, Development and Foreign Policy. Air 
power supports these objectives as follows.
a. Strengthening security and defence at home and overseas.  The 
core purpose of air power activity is providing military capability in 
the air domain to deter and, if required, defeat threats to the UK and 
Overseas Territories. The most visible and persistent example of this 
is the RAF combat aircraft, air-to-air refuelling aircraft and control and 
reporting centres, which provide the permanently available airborne 
quick reaction alert capability.20
b. Building resilience at home and overseas. The attributes of 
air power make it a valuable tool for supporting resilience activities, 
be that rapidly delivering humanitarian aid to the Caribbean in 2017 
following a hurricane, supporting activity to prevent the Whaley Bridge 
dam collapsing during flooding in the UK in 2019 or rapidly delivering 
vaccines and moving patients by air during the response to the 
COVID-19 pandemic in 2020–21.
c. Shaping the open international order of the future. UK air power 
acts in support of this objective by demonstrating adherence to the 
laws, rules and conventions that underpin the rules-based international 
order whilst conducting all activities, and encouraging allies and 
partners and other air arms with whom we operate to act in a similar 
fashion. Other activities such as mentoring and building the capacity of 
friendly or non-aligned nations also assists.
19 T he Red Arrows 2017 tour of the Asia Pacific and Middle East regions generated inward 
investment of approximately £4.2 billion.
20 A ir power activity such as the quick reaction alert can provide a highly effective means 
of messaging within information operations activity that forms a part of deterrence.
21
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power

d. Sustaining strategic advantage through science and 
technology. Air power has always been at the cutting edge of 
technology and the UK’s continued investment and involvement in the 
plethora of technological developments linked to air power continues to 
support this objective. The work being done by Team Tempest, linking 
national and commercial scientific and technological development 
with operational requirements, to develop the RAF’s sixth generation 
combat aircraft is a prime example of this.
22
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
1
An introduction to air power

 
Key points
• Air power is defined as: the ability to use air capabilities in and from the air, 
to influence the behaviour of actors and the course of events.
• UK air power is persistently active, domestically and globally, protecting UK 
national interests at home and overseas.
• Although air power can be used independently of the other operational 
domains, it seeks to create effects and exert influence within them.
• Conversely, maritime, land, space and cyber forces all have the ability to 
influence events in the air environment.
• Being agile, adaptable and capable, UK air power has significant utility 
because it possesses an array of capabilities that can offer a tailored 
response to evolving circumstances.
• Air power is truly global in nature because it theoretically enables access to 
any point on Earth, be it over land or sea.
• Air power offers policymakers an agile, timely and focused capability that 
can be highly effective in resolving or averting a developing crisis.
23
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
1
An introduction to air power

[Page 34: No extractable text]

25
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Chapter 2
This chapter discusses the roles of air power. It also 
introduces air command and control as a critical enabler and 
electromagnetic warfare as a key enabler.
Section 1 – Control of the air  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
Section 2 – Attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
Section 3 – Intelligence, surveillance and  
                   reconnaissance. . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
Section 4 – Air mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  39
Section 5 – Key enablers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  42

For good or for ill, air mastery is 
today the supreme expression of 
military power and fleets and armies, 
however vital and important, must 
accept a subordinate rank.
 
 
Sir Winston Churchill”
“
26
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power

Chapter 2
The roles of air power
2.1. There are four fundamental roles of air power: control of the air; attack; 
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR); and air mobility. These four 
roles are shown in Figure 2.1. When conducted in isolation, combined or, more 
usually, as part of multi-domain operations within an integrated approach, 
these roles contribute to persistent influence and deterrence activities as well 
as to the direct task assigned.
Figure 2.1 – The roles of air power
Control
of the air
Attack
Intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance
Air mobility
Air power roles
27
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power

Section 1 – Control of the air
2.2. Control of the air underpins all air operations because it secures freedom 
of action in the air domain, while limiting or denying its use by an adversary. It 
is this role that protects the UK, Overseas Territories and deployed forces from 
attack. It also enables freedom of manoeuvre across the maritime and land 
domains and safeguards space and cyber fixed infrastructure, enabling forces 
to dominate the engagement space21 and seize the initiative. The breakdown of 
control of the air is depicted in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2 – Breakdown of the control of the air role
Offensive counter-air missions
Surface attack Active air and
missile defence
Detection
Identiﬁcation
and assessment
Interception
and engagement
Passive air and
missile defence
Detection and warning
Camouﬂage, concealment
and deception
Chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear
Hardening, dispersal
and recuperation
Redundancy
Mobility
Fighter sweep/escort
Suppression of enemy air defences
High-value airborne asset attack
Air and missile defence
(defensive counter-air missions)
Control
of the air
28
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
2.3. Control of the air is a relative condition and depends on available 
resources, an adversary’s capability and will, and the risk that a commander 
21 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) has agreed that engagement space and 
battlespace are synonyms. The UK uses engagement space as it better describes the 
contemporary operating environment.

is prepared to accept. Maritime and land operations can be conducted without 
achieving control of the air in advance, but the associated risks could be 
significant. There are three degrees of control of the air.22
a. Air parity. Air parity exists where no force enjoys decisive control of 
the air in either time or space. Consequently, both friendly and adversary 
land, maritime and air forces may encounter significant interference by the 
opposing force. Parity is not a ‘stand-off’, nor does it mean that air operations 
have halted. On the contrary, parity may be typified by high-i ntensity air 
operations with maximum effort exerted between belligerents to achieve 
some level of favourable control. This condition is a major resource drain and 
losses due to an adversary’s air power can be anticipated.
b. Air superiority. Air superiority is that degree of dominance in the air battle 
of one force over another, which permits the conduct of operations by the 
former, and its related maritime, land and air forces, at a given time and place, 
without prohibitive interference by the opposing force.
c. Air supremacy. Air supremacy is the degree of air superiority where the 
opposing air force is incapable of effective interference. It is important to note 
that even air supremacy cannot guarantee that an adversary will not inflict 
some damage or losses, particularly given the extensive proliferation of small 
arms weapons and man-portable air defence systems. This is normally the 
highest level of control of the air that a joint force can achieve.
2.4. Control of the air is not a permanent state and constant activity is required to 
achieve it. To gain and maintain the required degree of control of the air, counter-a ir 
operations are conducted to disrupt, degrade, deny or destroy an adversary’s 
ability to challenge such control. Counter-air operations comprise two key missions: 
offensive counter-air (OCA) and defensive counter-a ir (DCA) missions.
a. Offensive counter-air missions. OCA missions target enemy air 
capabilities as close to their source as possible. They are generally 
proactive in nature and seek to dominate an adversary’s airspace to prevent 
them launching threats against our forces by affecting them on the ground, 
along with their supporting systems. Although primarily conducted by 
aircraft, they can also be conducted by naval surface or sub-surface fire, 
land artillery or special forces direct action targeted against adversary air 
capabilities.23
22 A llied Joint Publication (AJP)-3.3.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Counter-Air Operations .
23 S ee Air Publication (AP) 3002, Air and Space Warfare, Edition 4, Chapter 5 for more detail 
on individual OCA missions.
29
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power

b. Defensive counter-air missions. DCA missions, otherwise known 
as air and missile defence operations, are generally reactive in nature 
and seek to nullify or reduce the effectiveness of enemy air and missile 
threats through active or passive measures. Active measures include 
methods of detection, interception and engagement. These measures 
are usually achieved via a system of layered defence-in-depth using 
reactive air-t o-a ir fighters, surface-to-air missile (SAM) systems and 
additional aircraft placed on ground or airborne alert. 24 Such a system is 
termed an integrated air and missile defence system. Passive measures 
for the defence and protection of friendly forces include: early warning; 
camouflage, concealment and deception; hardening; recuperation; 
redundancy; dispersal; mobility; and the use of chemical, biological, 
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) protective equipment and facilities.25 
2.5. Challenges to control of the air. Western air power has dominated 
conflicts in which it has been involved over the past 40 years, ensuring a 
high degree of control of the air and thereby helping to lower the risk to 
operations in other operational domains. However, to achieve a similar 
degree of control of the air in future will require focused, tailored, aggressive 
24 S ee AJP-3.3.1, Allied Joint Doctrine for Counter-Air Operations , for more details.
25 S ee AP3002, Air and Space Warfare, Edition 4, Chapter 5, for more detail on individual 
DCA missions and Allied Tactical Publication-3.3.6, Force Protection for Air Operations and 
AP3241, RAF Force Protection for Air Operations for the links between passive DCA and 
passive force protection measures.
30
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
Somewhere off the UK, a Typhoon FGR4 intercepts and escorts a  
Russian Tupolev TU-95 Bear

and innovative counter-a ir campaigns. This is due to the threats posed by 
increasingly sophisticated anti-a ccess and area denial (A2AD) capabilities, 
including electromagnetic warfare, cyber operations, SAM systems, and ballistic, 
hypersonic and counter-carrier missiles. Such capabilities are designed to 
prevent deployment to a theatre of operations or deny air operations in theatre. 
The emerging threat from hostile uncrewed aircraft also challenges control 
of lower airspace, threatening land and maritime forces. We must therefore 
continue to develop counter-A2AD and uncrewed aircraft system technologies 
to ensure freedom of action in a contested, degraded and operationally limited 
domain. The challenge to control of the air may also be increasingly contested 
in the home environment. It is likely that this will initially be through cyber 
and electromagnetic asymmetric actions, but peer adversaries do have the 
capability to challenge our domestic control of the air with capabilities across all 
operational domains.
31
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power
Operation Granby versus Operation Corporate
Operation Granby was the UK’s military contribution to the United States-l ed 
coalition that freed Kuwait from Iraqi occupation in 1991. The Iraqi Army was 
the fifth largest in the world and President Saddam Hussein intended to inflict 
an unacceptable level of casualties on the coalition. However, the coalition 
exploited their comparative advantage – air power – to avoid fighting on his 
terms. Control of the air was quickly achieved, enabling coalition air forces to 
switch the main effort to counter-land operations against Iraqi ground forces. 
This was so successful that the Iraqi Army’s combat capability was vastly 
reduced by the time the coalition launched the land offensive and helped 
ensure a decisive victory with only a few coalition casualties.
In comparison, it was difficult to secure control of the air with the limited 
carrier-borne capabilities available for Operation Corporate, the UK’s 1982 
campaign to retake the Falkland Islands. The continuing Argentinean air threat 
meant that the carrier group had to remain east of the Islands after landing the 
task force at San Carlos. The range to the combat zone also limited the time 
that fighters could spend on task. With only partial air cover available, some 
Argentinean aircraft penetrated the defensive screen provided by the Royal 
Navy’s frigates and destroyers, inflicting significant losses on the task force. 
Sufficient control of the air was attained to ensure that the campaign was 
successful, but the margins were fine. The Falklands conflict highlights  
the potential risks if a campaign is mounted without the assurance of control  
of the air.

32
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
Section 2 – Attack
2.6. The use of overwhelming force through an attack from the air lies at the 
heart of the ability of air power to influence the behaviour of actors and the 
course of events. Air attack can deter adversaries, disrupt their activities or 
ultimately defeat them by destroying their resources and capabilities. UK air 
power is equipped with a broad spectrum of precise weapon technologies, 
both lethal and non-lethal, offering the ability to decisively shape the 
engagement space, in any weather conditions, day or night. The attack role 
consists of three mission types: strategic attack; counter-land operations; and 
counter-maritime operations. Figure 2.3 illustrates this breakdown.
 Figure 2.3 – The breakdown of the attack role
Strategic attack Counter-land operations
Attack
Counter-maritime operations
Air interdiction
Close air support
Anti-submarine warfare
Surface warfare
2.7. Strategic attack.  These operations are aimed at an adversary’s 
fundamental ability to wage war by attacking their structures or organisations. 
Targets may include centres of gravity, such as national leadership and 
command elements, war production resources or critical national infrastructure 
and resources. In this context, ‘strategic’ describes the effect, not the location 
or distance to the target, or type of weapon system or delivery platform. 
It can be at its most effective when a wide array of targets are attacked 
simultaneously, causing maximum shock effect and placing significant stress 
on an adversary’s processes, thereby limiting their ability to adapt and react. 

Because of its independence of surface limitations and its superior 
speed the airplane is the offensive weapon par excellence.
Giulio Douhet
“
33
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power
2.8. Counter-land operations. These operations are conducted to defeat 
an adversary’s fielded forces, destroy their supporting infrastructure or create 
psychological effects to shatter their cohesion or will to fight. Counter-land 
operations are also a force multiplier because they enhance the potency of 
friendly land forces, allowing them to achieve their objectives while minimising 
the risk of casualties. They consist of two broad mission types: air interdiction 
and close air support (CAS).
a. Air interdiction. Air interdiction is the activities conducted to disrupt, 
degrade, deny or destroy an adversary’s capabilities before they can 
be used against friendly forces. Air interdiction targets elements such 
as enemy personnel, lines of communication, command and control 
nodes, logistics and supporting systems at ranges beyond which an 
adversary can engage friendly land forces. It can be conducted in 
support of friendly land force operations but since it is normally carried 
out at significant distance from their location, detailed integration is not 
routinely required. However, when air interdiction is conducted between 
the forward line of own troops (FLOT)26 and the fire support coordination 
line (FSCL),27 in airspace controlled by the land commander and thus 
requiring coordination between air and land forces, these missions are 
categorised as battlefield air interdiction (BAI).28 There are two main 
employment options for air interdiction, which are pre-planned and 
immediate. The most efficient option is pre-planned because this allows 
planning to take into account the multitude of variables that will affect 
the probability of target destruction. Immediate air interdiction, attacking 
mobile or short-notice targets, may appear to offer a more flexible 
response, but the trade-off may be a reduction in the planning and 
26 T he forward line of own troops is defined as: a line which indicates the most forward 
positions of friendly forces in any kind of military operation at a specific time.  NATOTerm.
27 T he fire support coordination line is defined as: within an assigned area of operations, 
a line established by a land or amphibious force commander to denote coordination 
requirements for fires by other force elements which may affect the commander’s current 
and planned operations. NATOTerm. (See lexicon for full definition.)
28 I ncreases in the range of land rocket artillery systems means that battlefield air 
interdiction is likely to be more prevalent in the future as the distance between the FLOT 
and the FSCL is expected to increase.

34
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
coordination time, which in turn can reduce the probability of success. 
The increasing sophistication and utility of data link communication 
between ground units and aircraft does mitigate the impact of reduced 
formal planning and coordination time. Where the exact location of the 
enemy is unknown, kill box interdiction (KBI), strike coordination and 
reconnaissance (SCAR) and armed reconnaissance may be tasked to 
attack targets of opportunity.29
b. Close air support. CAS is the action taken to disrupt, degrade, deny 
or destroy enemy activity or capabilities that are in close proximity to 
friendly land forces. It complements land force ground attack capabilities 
with significant firepower to coerce adversary forces. Consequently, 
intensive air-land integration and coordination is critical to accurately 
identify targets and minimise the risk of fratricide. CAS can be crucial to 
the success or survival of land forces, as has been proven during recent 
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
2.9. Counter-maritime operations. Air power can be used to conduct 
direct action in the maritime domain or to enable and enhance surface and 
sub-surface capabilities. Counter-maritime operations are the employment 
of air attack in the maritime domain and consist of two mission types: 
anti-s ubmarine warfare and surface warfare. 30
a. Anti-submarine warfare. These are operations which search for, 
locate, track and attack submarines and their support assets. Sensors 
can be used to detect submarines, including radar, electro-optical 
sensors, magnetic anomaly detection devices, and active or passive 
acoustic sensors.
b. Surface warfare. These are operations which detect and engage 
adversary maritime surface forces. The type of support provided by 
aircraft depends on operational requirements and on their capabilities, 
but it can include detection, location, identification, tracking and, 
ultimately, attack. 
29 F or more detail see AP3002, Air and Space Warfare, Edition 4, Chapter 6.
30 I n maritime doctrine anti-submarine warfare and surface warfare are sub-sets of 
underwater warfare and above-water warfare respectively; but for the purposes of 
air attack doctrine they are considered in isolation. The term surface warfare is being 
incorporated into Royal Navy doctrine, it is also used by the United States Navy, and is 
increasingly being adopted across NATO; however, officially, NATO still uses anti-surface 
warfare.

35
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power
2.10. Challenges to attack.  The success of an air attack is largely dependent 
on the ability of aircraft or weapons to penetrate or counter adversary air 
defences, and these have become increasingly capable. There are also 
practical limits to the number of weapons that aircraft can carry. However, 
this challenge has been mitigated by the development of precision-guided 
weapons and electronic attack technology, which has led to the same or 
even greater effect being created with a fewer weapons. Poor weather can 
also hinder attack operations but the development of a wide range of weapon 
guidance options, such as laser, Global Positioning System (GPS) or radar 
guidance, have mitigated this challenge and provide significant operational and 
tactical flexibility. Air attacks can therefore be conducted by day or night and 
in adverse weather conditions, which can provide a distinct advantage if an 
adversary lacks such capabilities.
Section 3 – Intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance
2.11. The use of aircraft changed how the battlespace, as it was then termed, 
was viewed, as they provided an alternative perspective to that offered by 
maritime or land platforms. The ISR role, illustrated in Figure 2.4, develops 
situational awareness and enhances understanding, thereby helping shape the 
conduct of operations. 
Poseidon MRA1 maritime patrol aircraft launches a Mk 54 torpedo

36
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
Figure 2.4 – The breakdown of the intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance role
2.12. The synchronisation of information collected from aircraft and the 
subsequent processing, exploitation and dissemination (PED) identifies trends, 
linkages and threats. It supports decision-making by enabling the identification 
of an adversary’s dependencies, vulnerabilities and strengths. ISR consists of 
three linked ‘inform’ functions.
a. Intelligence.  Aircraft do not directly deliver intelligence but 
provide timely, accurate and relevant information that is processed 
and disseminated, and potentially combined with other sources of 
information to provide intelligence. Intelligence informs political and 
military decision-making processes and makes a major contribution to 
the assessment of when and how specific objectives might be achieved 
or an end state attained.
b. Surveillance. Surveillance is the continuing and systematic 
observation of a wide area of interest. The area of interest can be in any 
Intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance
Intelligence Surveillance Reconnaissance
Traditional
Non-traditional
Tasking
Collection
Processing
Exploitation
Visual
Aural
Electronic
Photographic
Dissemination

“
37
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power
one of the air, surface or sub-surface environments, observed by visual, 
aural, electronic, photographic or other means. It is not orientated 
towards a specific target but designed to provide warning of broad 
adversarial initiatives and to detect potential threats.
c. Reconnaissance. Reconnaissance complements surveillance 
by observing a specific area of interest to gain specific information 
about specific activities. Intelligence that is critical to the prosecution 
of current operations is often derived from reconnaissance operations, 
so it should be evaluated and transmitted with minimum delay to those 
elements that need the information.
Find the enemy. Don’t let the enemy find you. Reconnaissance! 
Reconnaissance! Reconnaissance!
Tom Clancy
2.13. Speed and wide area surveillance capabilities make aircraft among the 
most responsive of ISR platforms and their reach gives them the ability to fly long 
distances and cover vast areas, collecting information from a variety of sensors. 
Radar, acoustic, imagery and signals intelligence sensors have varying but 
complementary operating characteristics, offering a spread of options. Crews 
are trained to recognise and respond to changing conditions by modifying 
missions whilst they are in progress, and share information gained from onboard 
systems through voice or data links.31 Uncrewed aircraft, whilst not, currently, 
being as fast as crewed aircraft, do tend to have greater endurance and can 
provide significant persistence when compared with crewed aircraft.
2.14. The effectiveness of individual ISR capabilities can be increased by 
networking them into a system. For example, a surveillance sensor on a given 
ISR aircraft can observe a wide area before cueing higher resolution sensors 
with a narrower field of view to conduct reconnaissance on a specific point of 
interest. Secure network systems also enable multiple platforms to benefit from 
the ISR capabilities generated and shared by a single aircraft.
2.15. Historically, large ISR aircraft provided the majority of air-enabled 
ISR but this role is no longer limited to those aircraft or sensors that were 
31 Short-notice modification of missions can be enhanced by near real time processing, 
exploitation and dissemination support.

38
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
specifically designed for this role. The increasing sophistication of airborne 
sensors has resulted in many aircraft being able to conduct ISR, even if it is 
not their primary mission. Combat aircraft and helicopters provide significant 
input to the ISR enterprise. However, unlike large, multi-crew ISR aircraft, 
non-d edicated ISR aircraft do not always have an associated analytical 
capability, or the means to effectively disseminate information.
2.16. Challenges to intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance. The 
main challenges to air ISR centre on data volume, impermanence and threat. 
These challenges are explored below.
a. Data volume.  There are significant PED demands associated 
with collecting large volumes of data by a number of multi-spectral 
sensors. This presents the challenge of providing decision-makers with 
fused intelligence that they can act on, rather than proliferating data 
from a multitude of systems that may swamp decision-makers with 
unactionable information. Some ISR sensors can also be negatively 
impacted by poor weather conditions and the use of camouflage 
and concealment techniques. However, by using a broad spectrum 
of sensors on a variety of aircraft, some of these challenges can be 
overcome.
b. Impermanence.  The impermanence of air power has historically 
and justifiably been recognised as a limitation of air power and it is 
one that particularly affects the ISR role. However, although aircraft 
are not able to remain airborne indefinitely, despite the benefits of 
air-to-a ir refuelling, the increased loiter time of uncrewed aircraft has 
brought significant benefits as points of interest can, potentially, be 
persistently monitored. The Ministry of Defence is expanding airborne 
ISR capabilities by harnessing emerging technologies to overcome the 
challenge of impermanence, as demonstrated by the acquisition of 
high-altitude pseudo satellites, such as Zephyr, and further mitigating 
the impermanence of aircraft by enhancing the space-based ISR suite. 32
c. Threat. Traditional airborne ISR is increasingly threatened by 
long-ra nge SAMs, air-to-air missiles and targeted jamming. These 
threats force ISR aircraft to operate further away from their areas of 
interest, thus reducing their effectiveness.
32 M ore detail on space-based ISR is contained in Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-40, 
UK Space Power.

39
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power
Section 4 – Air mobility
2.17. Air mobility provides the ability to deploy, sustain and recover personnel 
and equipment, often over significant distance. The speed and reach of air 
power offers the ability to create rapid strategic influence in support of UK 
national objectives or in support of allies, such as through the insertion of 
special forces or delivering humanitarian aid due to a natural disaster. At the 
operational and tactical levels, air mobility supports land operations by enabling 
manoeuvre when movement on land is particularly difficult due to poor terrain, 
poor roads or unacceptable threats to land forces. Air mobility consists of three 
mission types: air-to-air refuelling; airlift; and personnel recovery. These are 
illustrated in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5 – The breakdown of the air mobility role
Air-to-air refuelling Airlift Personnel recovery
Search and rescue operations
Combat recovery
Hub and spoke
Airborne operations
Aeromedical evacuation
Special forces air operations
Air mobility
2.18. Air-to-air refuelling.  Air-to-air refuelling significantly increases the reach, 
endurance and flexibility of air power and is therefore a crucial capability. It 
enhances strategic and operational mobility by helping to mitigate access 
issues caused by a lack of basing options, overflight limitations or A2AD 
threats that may otherwise constrain air operations. It also improves the 

40
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
persistence, availability and responsiveness of tactical air operations by 
maximising the endurance of combat aircraft.33
2.19. Airlift. Airlift is the ability to transport personnel and materiel through the 
air; they can be either inter- or intra-theatre and are subdivided into: hub and 
spoke operations; airborne operations; aeromedical evacuation; and special 
forces air operations.
a. Hub and spoke operations. Hub and spoke operations consist of 
inter- and intra-theatre airlift and are the cornerstone of airlift operations 
to operational theatres, delivering personnel and/or equipment as 
required. Inter-theatre airlift provides the air bridge that links the UK to 
airfields in, or near, theatres of operations, known as hubs. It is provided 
by air transport aircraft operating in the strategic role, supplemented 
by chartered civilian airlift. The hub is the focal point for subsequent 
intra-theatre airlift to spoke airfields located throughout the theatre 
of operations. Intra-theatre airlift is normally fulfilled by fixed-w ing air 
transport aircraft operating in the tactical role or support helicopters, 
both of which are capable of operating under a wide range of 
conditions, including small, remote field operations. It should be noted 
that not all airlift tasks will require the use of hub and spoke operations; 
routine national or global movement of cargo and passengers frequently 
operate directly between military air bases and civil airports with no 
requirement for the onward movement of payload by air. 
b. Airborne operations. Airborne operations are the transportation of 
land forces and their equipment directly to, or close to, their objective 
and subsequently sustaining or extracting them, when required. This 
can be done by either air-land or air-drop operations. Air-land delivery 
is when an aircraft lands directly at its objective to unload, whereas 
air-d rop is delivery from an aircraft in flight, using parachutes.
33 B y increasing the flight time of combat aircraft, they can extend their combat air patrols 
in support of a control of the air mission, remain airborne to attack more targets in an air 
interdiction mission, provide longer support to land forces in a close air support mission, or 
gather time-critical reconnaissance information in the ISR role.
During World War 2 some dogs were trained to parachute alongside 
British paratroopers. ‘Para Dogs’ went into action on D-Day, when 
a dog, called ‘Bing’, landed in a tree where he remained until his handler 
could rescue him the next morning!

41
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power
c. Aeromedical evacuation. Aeromedical evacuation is a specialist 
form of airlift that transports injured or seriously ill personnel under 
medical supervision. Forward aeromedical evacuation is moving 
injured personnel from the battlefield to appropriate medical treatment 
facilities. Tactical aeromedical evacuation is moving patients between 
medical facilities in, or close to, theatre. Strategic aeromedical 
evacuation operations involve repatriating ill or wounded personnel 
from in-theatre medical facilities, primarily in specially equipped and 
staffed aircraft.34
d. Special forces air operations. Special forces air operations are air 
operations conducted by specialist aircraft and personnel that enable 
the insertion, sustainment and extraction of special forces. Although 
all four air power roles could be used to support special forces 
operations, having the ability to rapidly move specialist personnel in 
support of high priority political objectives is a critical capability.
2.20. Personnel recovery.  Personnel recovery operations frequently use 
air mobility capabilities to rescue captured, isolated or missing personnel 
during combat or peacetime operations. Personnel recovery is subdivided into 
34 F or more detail on aeromedical evacuation operations, see AJP-4.10, Allied Joint 
Medical Doctrine for Medical Support  (with UK national elements) and AP3002, Air and 
Space Warfare, Edition 4, Chapter 8.
Pathfinder personnel practise high altitude low opening insertion from a Globemaster C-17

42
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
peacetime recovery and combat recovery.35  Peacetime recovery operations 
are undertaken to recover personnel where no threat is posed by hostile 
interference, such as search and rescue operations or military assistance to 
the civil authorities. A combat recovery operation is the extraction of isolated 
personnel from a situation where hostile interference is expected; it is therefore 
amongst the most time-sensitive of air operations.
2.21. Challenges to air mobility. There are practical limits to the payload that 
aircraft can carry, but this limitation needs to be offset against the advantages 
offered by speed and reach. Maritime platforms can move significantly more 
personnel and equipment in support of military operations but at significantly 
slower speeds. Also, movement on the ground is relatively time consuming 
and can be hindered by terrain or contested by a threat. Air mobility therefore 
balances the challenge of a limited payload with the military advantages 
offered by speed of action. Air mobility aircraft can also be more vulnerable 
to air and ground launched threats due to their size, relatively slow speed and 
limited manoeuvrability. However, by understanding the threats posed before 
employing air mobility aircraft, and ensuring that the aircraft are equipped with 
appropriate platform protection capabilities, actions can be taken to mitigate 
the risk posed. 
Section 5 – Key enablers
2.22. Air command and control. The four fundamental roles of air power, 
conceptually and doctrinally endorsed and operationally validated throughout 
the history of British air power, and mirrored in the doctrine of the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and wider allies and partners, do not, 
in themselves, fully describe why air power can be so effective. The four 
fundamental roles explain what air power can deliver, but there has to be 
something that enables the synergy, both across the roles and to integrate 
air power with the other operational domains. This critical enabler, driven 
by information, is command and control, which provides the where, when, 
why, how, what and with what of air power. Without it, air activities would be 
incoherent and ineffective. Command and control is not a role in its own right 
but, as can be seen in Figure 2.6, it envelops all air activities and, in turn, is 
cocooned by the sphere of information, whilst air activities are delivered by 
the fundamental roles. The criticality of air command and control has only 
35 F or more detail on personnel recovery operations, see AJP-3.7, Allied Joint Doctrine 
for the Recovery of Personnel in a Hostile Environment , Allied Personnel Recovery 
Publication-3.3.7 .5, The NATO Survival, Escape/Evasion, Resistance and Extraction 
Training Standard and AP3002, Air and Space Warfare , Edition 4, Chapter 8.

43
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power
increased as air activities are now delivered within multi-domain operations as 
part of integrated action. Air command and control is discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 3.
Figure 2.6 – The air power model
Info rm atio n
C om m and  and  control
Control
of the air
AttackAir mobility
Intelligence, surveillance
and reconnaissance
2.23. Electromagnetic warfare.  Access to the electromagnetic environment 
(EME) is a key enabler across all the roles of air power. Electromagnetic 
activities aim to assure freedom of action across the electromagnetic spectrum 
whilst denying an adversary such freedoms. It includes: electronic defence to 
assure freedom of action for friendly forces; electronic surveillance to enable us 
to understand the threat systems, communication and navigation limitations, 
or exploitable opportunities throughout the EME; and electronic attack, which 
can increase the scope of available strike options, including that of non-kinetic 
action. When considered in the context of the pervasiveness of information 
and the political risk of collateral damage caused by kinetic weapons, 
electronic attack may be more politically acceptable.

44
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
2
The roles of air power
Chinook deploying self-protection infrared flares
Summary of the roles of air power 
2.24. Although the four roles of air power are treated as being distinct, 
there is also overlap. Modern, multi-role aircraft afford a significant degree of 
simultaneity, whereby a single aircraft can perform more than one role, even 
during the same mission if necessary. For example, a Lightning II can conduct 
ISR tasks whilst engaged in a counter-maritime attack mission. As technology 
advances and multi-role aircraft continue to be developed, there is potential 
for the overlap between roles to increase further. This is a key strength of air 
power, as simultaneity bolsters its agility, flexibility and adaptability.
I believe that the first and great principle of war is that you must first 
win your air battle before you fight your land and sea battle. 
Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery
“

 
Key points 
• The four core roles of air power are: control of the air; attack; ISR; and air 
mobility.
• Control of the air underpins all air operations because it secures freedom 
of action in the air domain, while limiting or denying its use by an 
adversary.
• The use of overwhelming force through an attack from the air lies at the 
heart of the ability of air power to influence the behaviour of actors and 
the course of events.
• The speed of aircraft enables highly responsive ISR solutions; their reach 
gives them the ability to fly long distances and cover vast areas, collecting 
information from a variety of sensors.
• Air mobility provides the ability to deploy, sustain and recover personnel 
and equipment, often over significant distance.
• Modern, multi-role aircraft afford a significant degree of simultaneity, 
whereby a single aircraft can perform more than one role during the same 
mission.
• Command and control envelopes all four air power roles and it is critical 
for the effective delivery of air power.
• Access to the electromagnetic spectrum is a key enabler for all air 
activity; it is required for effective communication and data exchange 
across all force elements and is relied upon for platform navigation as well 
as numerous attack and defence activities.
45
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
2
The roles of air power

[Page 56: No extractable text]

47
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Chapter 3
Chapter 3 outlines the principles of air command and control 
and provides an overview of the capabilities the UK uses 
to deliver air command and control across the continuum 
of competition. It also describes in broad terms how air 
power is planned and tasked at the operational level and the 
associated air operations tasking cycle. 
Section 1 – Principles  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 49
Section 2 – UK air command and control capabilities  . 57
Section 3 – Planning and tasking  . . . . . . . . . . .  59

An air force commander must 
exploit the extreme flexibility, 
the high tactical mobility, and 
the supreme offensive quality 
inherent in air forces, to mystify 
and mislead his enemy, and 
so to threaten his various vital 
centres as to compel him to be 
dangerously weak at the point 
which is really decisive at the time.
 
Marshal of the RAF Sir John C. Slessor ”
“
48
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control

49
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
Chapter 3
Command and control
3.1. Effective command and control underpins the successful employment of 
all elements of the military instrument; it is not unique to air power. However, 
air power, by the very nature of its work, can be extremely sensitive to any 
misdirection and operational experience has highlighted that air power has 
to be underpinned by a fast decision cycle if it is to be employed effectively. 
Additionally, air power’s ubiquity means that it can be applied across multiple 
theatres, joint operations areas or even globally with competing demands 
placed upon limited resources. Consequently, air command and control is 
the key enabler without which the four fundamental air power roles cannot be 
delivered effectively, irrespective of the size or nature of an operation.
Section 1 – Principles
Unity of command
3.2. Unity of command ensures the concentration of effort for every objective 
is placed under one responsible commander. This is particularly important 
for air operations, irrespective of where on the continuum of competition they 
take place. Air assets are highly sought after because they are able to pursue 
strategic, operational and tactical objectives simultaneously. However, they 
can be limited in numbers or availability, so there is significant potential for 
fragmentation of the air effort. A component request for tactical air support 
could compete with the allocation of the same air resource for operational or 
strategic objectives. Consequently, centralised command of air forces under a 
single air commander is a fundamental tenet of air command and control.
3.3. Competing demands must be prioritised and apportioned accordingly; 
the enduring principle of centralised control ensures that aircraft are used 
as efficiently as possible to achieve military objectives. It prevents them from 
being inappropriately tasked by uncoordinated users against impractical 
objectives or being divided into small packages of air power that would 
inhibit flexibility and hinder any requirement for a rapid concentration of force. 
In addition, air operations can take place simultaneously across single or 
multiple theatres of operation. However, no single person is likely to have the 
level of situational awareness required to manage all concurrent activities. 
Decentralised execution delegates execution authority to subordinate or 

50
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
on-s cene commanders, thereby shortening the decision cycle and increasing 
speed of action. It is also the only feasible option for complex air campaigns, 
especially where communications or data links may be degraded or denied.  
3.4. Aligned with the UK and North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) joint 
doctrine philosophy of mission command, the UK’s preferred method for air 
command and control is centralised control and decentralised execution. That 
said, depending on the operational context, two other options exist that can be 
adopted to suit a specific operation or task.   
a. Centralised control, centralised execution.  Centralised execution 
authority may be necessary in certain operational circumstances 
where the stakes are particularly high or where the highest-value 
assets are being employed. It might also be appropriate when there is 
a requirement to closely manage air activities that might have strategic 
effects, even though this may adversely affect tactical efficiency. A 
potential disadvantage of centralised execution authority is that it 
can result in a rigid approach that lacks tactical flexibility and is not 
responsive enough to local conditions. As a result, it may only be suited 
to specific operations for short periods of time.
b. Decentralised control, decentralised execution.  The decentralised 
control and execution of air power may be allocated to subordinate 
commanders for specific periods of time to improve responsiveness. 
Nominated air units could integrate as specific task-focused and 
organised joint teams for certain operations.
Centralised control, centralised execution – Operation  
Enduring Freedom
Centralised control, centralised execution is necessary in certain 
circumstances, but it can also increase risk because it reduces operational 
tempo. Operation Enduring Freedom was the response by the United 
States (US) to global terrorism following the 11 September 2001 attacks in 
New York. The following month, the operators of a US uncrewed aircraft 
pinpointed the location of the supreme leader of the Taliban, Mullah 
Muhammad Omar, as he fled Kabul amongst a convoy of cars. As neither 
the uncrewed aircraft controllers nor the US Navy Fifth Fleet commander in 
Bahrain could authorise a strike, approval had to be sought from US Central 
Command in Tampa, Florida. The ensuing delay for strike approval allowed 
Mullah Mohammed Omar to escape.

51
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
Componency
3.5. The organisational command and control framework employed for air 
operations depends primarily upon the scale, size and complexity of the operating 
area. Complex operations are traditionally served by a deployable, or permanent, 
in-theatre command and control capability, especially when an operation is 
NATO-l ed, UK-led within a NATO framework, multinational coalition or US-led. 
However, the RAF’s new command and control model based around 11 Group 
also allows for the command and control of air operations ‘at range’ from the UK 
using robust and secure beyond line of sight voice and data communications.
3.6. At the operational level, the UK and NATO use the concept of component 
organisation36 to cohere multi-domain activity under a joint force commander 
(JFC), particularly for a deployed joint force. The 2* Standing Joint Force 
Headquarters provides this capability for the UK for small- and medium -s ized 
operations. 
3.7. A JFC may exercise command and control of joint air operations from 
their own headquarters, augmented by air component subject matter experts. 
However, it is more usual for the JFC to appoint a joint force air component 
commander (JFACC),37 chosen from whichever component has the majority of 
36 T he components are land, maritime, air, special forces and logistics. See Allied Joint 
Publication (AJP)-3, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Conduct Of Operations .
37 N ATO use the term commander joint force air component. Where an operation involves a 
coalition the term combined force air component commander (CFACC) may be used.
E-7 Wedgetail, the RAF’s future airborne early warning and control aircraft, which will  
enter service in 2024

52
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
air assets and the command and control capabilities required to plan, task and 
execute air operations.38
3.8. To efficiently employ the air capabilities available, the JFACC will normally 
exercise operational control over their own component’s forces, and tactical 
control over other components’ forces made available for tasking by the JFC. 
The JFC may also establish support relationships between the JFACC and 
other components to facilitate operations. For example, the JFACC will usually 
be the supported commander for control of the air operations. Irrespective of 
the size of the operation, there are four key responsibilities that normally fall to 
the JFACC. 
• Develop the overall air operations plan to support the desired 
outcomes of the JFC; this is normally referred to as the joint air 
operations plan (JAOP).
• Recommend to the JFC how best to assign the overall joint air 
capabilities available between the various lines of operation for a 
period of time; this is termed apportionment.
• Assign and task the joint air capabilities and forces made available 
by the Service components based on the JFC’s air apportionment 
decision.
• Provide oversight and guidance during the execution phase and 
evaluate the subsequent results.
3.9. Within the complex contemporary operating environment, competing 
demands for access to airspace from both military and civilian users are 
inevitable. To integrate, coordinate or deconflict all airspace user requirements, 
an airspace control authority (ACA) can be appointed, who will be responsible 
for establishing and operating an appropriate airspace control system 
promulgated through an airspace control plan. For operations where an 
adversary has an offensive air or missile capability, an air and missile defence 
commander (AMDC) will usually be appointed to integrate the air and missile 
defence capabilities of all components. Given the interdependence of airspace 
control and air and missile defence, ACA and AMDC responsibilities are 
normally given to the JFACC.
38 J oint air operations do not include those air operations that a component conducts as 
an integral and organic part of its own operations.

53
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
3.10. To fulfil their responsibilities, a JFACC is supported by a joint force air 
component headquarters (JFAC HQ), usually with an embedded air operations 
centre. This provides the critical interface between operational planning and 
tactical execution. Whilst the size, internal composition, battle rhythm and 
location of the JFAC HQ will vary according to the type and scope of mission, 
five elements are common to most. These are:
• a strategy division, which leads on long- and short-term air strategy 
and produces the JAOP;
• a combat plans division , which develops detailed execution plans;
• a combat operations division , which monitors and executes daily 
operations; 
• an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) division , 
which provides predictive and actionable intelligence, as well as a 
common threat and targeting picture; and 
• a combat support division , which coordinates administrative, 
communications, logistics, meteorology, information management 
and media engagement activities.
Merlin HM Mk2 airborne surveillance and control helicopters on board HMS Queen Elizabeth

54
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
3.11. Liaison between nations, components and non-military organisations 
is a key factor in the success of air operations; without it, air power cannot be 
employed effectively in support of multi-domain operations. This is illustrated 
in Figure 3.1. Whilst liaison can be conducted remotely via electronic means, 
all of the UK’s recent military operations have highlighted the value of personal 
contact between senior commanders and the utility of liaison officers in 
facilitating that contact. For liaison to work effectively, arrangements must span 
the operational and tactical levels. At the highest level, senior liaison officers 
must possess the authority to represent their commanders on critical issues; 
at lower levels, subject matter experts provide planning, tasking and execution 
expertise regarding their component or organisation’s activities.39  Where an 
operation is multinational, participating nations will usually send a national 
contingent commander to the JFAC HQ to ensure their assigned forces 
operate within national rules of engagement.
Combat
operations
Intelligence,
surveillance and
reconnaissance
Joint force air
component
headquarters
command group
Combat
plansStrategy
Liaison elements
Joint force air 
component commander
Combat
support
Figure 3.1 – A typical joint force air component headquarters structure
3.12. Rarely, if ever, will air power be used in isolation as a response to a 
crisis or to achieve a national objective; the UK’s approach to employing 
the military instrument of national power is by design cross-government 
and multi-agency, including working with non-governmental organisations 
39 For more detail on liaison arrangements between components see Air Publication  
(AP) 3002, Air and Space Warfare , Edition 4, Chapter 2.

55
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
where appropriate. Consequently, liaison arrangements within the JFAC HQ 
must take account of this. In addition, space services provide vital enabling 
capabilities for the air component, such as ISR, positioning, navigation and 
timing for aircraft and weapons, or voice and data communications. However, 
space assets are generally considered strategic in nature and can be national, 
military or privately owned and operated. Delegation of their command and 
control is unusual. Therefore, the presence of space subject matter experts 
within the JFAC HQ is key to ensuring effective air–space integration. To 
ensure unity of effort across the whole force, the JFC can appoint a space 
coordinating authority (SCA) to prioritise requirements and coordinate access. 
SCA responsibilities are usually delegated to the JFACC due to historical 
synergies between the air and space domains.  
Air command and control system
3.13. Air operations are controlled through an overarching air command and 
control structure supported by a robust command, control, communication, 
computers and information system (C4IS). Without the latter, the effective 
employment of air power can be difficult, if not impossible, which places 
significant emphasis on defensive cyber support. Operational experience has 
shown that whilst the air command and control system used will invariably be 
tailored to the task at hand, five broad design considerations need to be met 
if air power is to be employed successfully, irrespective of the nature of the 
operation. These are:  
• flexibility , capable of responding to a changing operational situation 
with minimum disruption or delay; 
• responsiveness, able to provide the JFACC, or their key 
subordinates, with the understanding required to make effective 
decisions and to pass subsequent orders quickly; 
• survivability , including protection from cyber and traditional threats 
as well as redundancy for critical command and control facilities and 
C4IS;
• sustainability , capable of conducting continuous operations 
throughout all phases of a campaign; and 
• interoperability , with joint and coalition command and control 
systems to enable unity of command.

56
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
3.14. In general, the JFAC HQ’s strategy, combat operations and ISR 
divisions form the core of the air operations centre, which acts as the senior 
element within the overall air command and control system.40  Tactical control 
for forces executing air missions is provided by an array of units subordinate 
to the air operations centre; these may be surface-based or airborne assets 
provided by the air, land and maritime components. 
3.15. Surface-based tactical command and control for air power provides a 
robust capability that is best suited to a permanent task such as national air 
policing or when a deployed presence in a theatre of operations is expected 
to be enduring; for example, providing air defence in the Falkland Islands. In 
addition, when a joint operations area is geographically large, sectorisation of 
the overall area between a number of ground-based command and control 
units can make the overall system more responsive, especially with regard to 
air and missile defence operations where speed of response to short-notice 
threats is critical. Control and reporting centres (CRCs) usually form the 
backbone of Western surface-based air command and control systems, a role 
performed by naval vessels such as the Royal Navy’s Type 45 destroyer in the 
maritime domain.
3.16. Airborne command and control can be either fixed-wing or rotary wing. 
Usually tasked with air surveillance and the tactical control of air operations, 
they enable the command and control of air assets operating beyond the radar 
and communications range of surface-based command and control units. 
Key to their effectiveness during combat operations is the placement of their 
operating orbits, which must balance the aircraft’s radar and communications 
range against the terrain and threat posed by an adversary’s counter-air 
capabilities. Coalition operations within the Middle East over the past 20 years 
have relied heavily upon aircraft such as the UK’s now retired E-3D Sentry 
to provide the deep look, low-level radar capability to support offensive and 
defensive air operations – most recently over Syria. Rapidly deployable from 
the UK, they provided Defence with the ability to respond quickly to a crisis 
or to conduct deterrence activity at range in support of allies. The continued 
relevance of this capability has seen the UK procure E-7 Wedgetail to replace 
the E-3D Sentry. 
40 T he air operations centre may be called a joint air operations centre (JAOC) or a 
combined air operations centre (CAOC) dependent upon whether the operation is US, 
NATO or UK led.

57
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
Section 2 – UK air command and 
control capabilities
3.17. UK air command and control capabilities are structured to support 
the broadest possible range of tasks, from homeland defence and persistent 
engagement activities such as the forward basing of air power assets, up to 
large-scale combat operations, as part of a NATO Article 5 response. The 
Royal Air Force (RAF) provides the core air command and control capability 
for Defence, augmented on a case-by-case basis by the other two Services 
to enable integration across the traditional warfighting domains. For deployed 
operations, these capabilities are usually under the operational command 
of the Chief of Joint Operations.41  Otherwise, the operational command and 
control of air forces will most likely rest with the RAF’s 3* Deputy Commander 
Operations, with delivery centred around 11 Group via either the National Air 
and Space Operations Centre (NASOC) or the UK JFAC HQ. 
The National Air and Space Operating Centre 
3.18. The NASOC is located at Headquarters Air Command and provides 
the UK with a permanent 24/7 air command and control capability to support 
enduring homeland defence commitments. The Air Officer Commanding 
41 F or more detail see Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 01, UK Joint Operations Doctrine .
RAF air operations personnel engaged in air battlespace management

58
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
11 Group acts as the day-to-day 2* air commander. The NASOC has two core 
air-r elated roles:
• maintaining the integrity of UK airspace; and
• providing support to NATO in the execution of its peacetime air 
policing mission.
3.19. To meet its national and NATO air policing responsibilities, the NASOC 
uses the UK Air Surveillance and Control System (ASACS), which is a network 
of ground-based military and civilian radars used to monitor, detect and 
identify all aircraft in and around UK airspace. The resulting recognised air 
picture is compiled by the NASOC’s subordinate CRC at RAF Boulmer,42 which 
also exercises tactical control of quick reaction alert fighters and supporting 
air-t o -a ir refuelling aircraft. Project Guardian is upgrading the ASACS to improve 
information exchange and integration with allies.
The UK Joint Force Air Component Headquarters
3.20. As part of 11 Group, the UK JFAC HQ provides a full-time permanent, 
fixed location air command and control capability collocated with the NASOC to 
support global air operations conducted under the responsibility of the Air Officer 
Commanding 11 Group.43 The UK JFAC HQ is structured in accordance with the 
model outlined within Section 1 of this chapter and comprises a command group 
with five subordinate divisions staffed by permanent personnel. The UK JFAC HQ 
also provides a high-r eadiness deployable air command and control capability 
with a permanently assigned 1* JFACC.44  
3.21. The UK JFAC HQ can provide a full range of air command and control in 
support of UK air operations, including up to medium-scale, within framework 
nation status or augmentation of an alliance or multinational headquarters. The 
unit is fully scalable and would operate in a configuration dependent upon the 
requirements of the operation to be supported. Employment options include 
the following. 
a. A UK-only operation at component scale where the UK would 
provide its own JFACC; all support and logistics functions would be 
carried out by UK personnel. For a small-scale national operation, air 
42 T he CRC also exchanges information via data links with neighbouring NATO partners, 
maritime units and airborne surveillance aircraft to generate the recognised air picture.
43 I n their role as the standing UK Global Air Component Commander.
44 W ithin NATO only the UK, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, Turkey and the US have this 
national capability.

59
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
command and control can be provided by the JFAC HQ ‘at range’ from 
its fixed location; alternatively, a small air command and control cell could 
be deployed to embed within a joint force headquarters. 
b. A UK-led coalition in which the UK would provide the JFACC and 
elements of the command hierarchy with most key functions being 
carried out by UK personnel. The expectation would be that the senior 
coalition partner would provide a deputy JFACC. This option requires 
the ability to fully embed coalition partners into the UK JFAC HQ 
infrastructure and C4IS.  
c. Augmentation of a coalition-led deployment, which would ideally 
see the UK provide the deputy JFACC and some key elements of the 
JFAC HQ structure. There would also be a requirement to deploy a 
national coordination team to monitor UK-specific issues under a UK 
air contingent commander who may dual-hat as the deputy JFACC.
d. NATO reinforcement, which would see core JFAC HQ personnel 
deployed to support or reinforce the NATO air command and control 
system during times of crisis and conflict. Under current plans, 
personnel would either be deployed to NATO Air Command to fill 
specified augmentee positions within the NATO Command Structure 
JFAC HQ or to a deployed NATO force structure JFAC HQ (which is 
provided on a rotational basis by member states). The UK JFAC HQ 
is certified for employment as a high readiness command and control 
element of the NATO Response Force and as such could deploy in full.
Section 3 – Planning and tasking
3.22. Air planning is usually conducted in parallel with joint, operational -l evel 
planning.45 Qualified and experienced air planners should engage early in the 
development of the joint operational plan to ensure that it is coherent and 
workable and that air options are fully considered and integrated from the 
start. A sound understanding of the wide variety of aircraft and their associated 
capabilities, as well as an understanding of the capabilities or operations that 
air power is supporting, is critical to the success of the planning phase. This 
section outlines the key steps in the planning and tasking process that are 
common to UK, NATO and the US.
45 S ee AJP-5, Allied Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations (with UK national 
elements) for more details.

60
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
Air estimate
3.23. Operational air planning begins when the need for military action 
involving air activity is identified. The air estimate is intended to develop 
the most effective air operations plan to meet the JFC’s intent and convey 
this information to those who will execute it. The process is not dissimilar 
to estimates carried out in other operational domains. The process is 
command-led and involves the JFAC HQ planning staff exploring the full 
range of probable and likely adversary and friendly courses of action before 
analysing and comparing friendly air capabilities against the likely threats. The 
air estimate is a continuous and iterative process with a number of key steps 
involved.46 The final step of most air estimate methodologies, the commander’s 
decision, is made by the JFC on which course of action to adopt as the 
concept of air operations. The decision is based on the recommendation of 
the air commander and the course of action becomes the basis for the JAOP .
46 T hese steps usually include background analysis, mission analysis, evaluation of 
factors, courses of action development, and the commander’s decision. However, the 
actual methodology used may vary. For example, the UK JFAC HQ use the process 
outlined within NATO’s Comprehensive Operations Planning Directive. See AJP-5, Allied 
Joint Doctrine for the Planning of Operations (with UK national elements) for more details.
Hercules C-130J refuelling from a Voyager KC3 above Ukraine in 2020

61
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
Joint air operations plan
3.24. The JAOP is the JFACC’s blueprint for integrating and coordinating 
air activities. It provides the necessary link to the JFC’s operational plan and 
outlines the phasing of the overall air campaign.47 A typical example of phasing 
might start with counter-air operations to gain a degree of control of the air 
over a specific area or at a specific time so that friendly forces can operate 
without unacceptable risk from adversary attack. This could be followed by a 
phase focusing on strategic attack, and then a phase of counter-land activity 
featuring concurrent air interdiction to shape the battlefield for friendly ground 
forces, and providing close air support. The JAOP will also usually include: 
• objectives and tasks by priority, describing in which order they should 
be actioned, the desired effects and the weight of effort required;
• the measures or indicators of success that are to be used to 
determine whether air operations are meeting assigned objectives; 
• detail on what air assets are required to achieve the air objectives, 
including force availability, deployment timing, basing availability and 
sustainment requirements; and
• specific procedures for allocating, tasking, exercising and 
transitioning the command and control of air assets.
The JAOP is implemented through the air tasking cycle, which provides 
an iterative and cyclical process for planning, apportioning, allocating, 
coordinating and tasking air assets.
47 A p hase will only indicate what the main effort is for the air component at a given time; 
however, air assets will almost certainly be conducting all roles of air power throughout a 
campaign or operation.
Before anything else, preparation is the key to success.
Alexander Graham Bell
“

62
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
The air tasking cycle
3.25. The air tasking cycle allows for changing tactical situations or 
commander’s guidance, as well as requests for support from other component 
commands at any stage in the cycle. The cycle, outlined in Figure 3.2, matches 
specific targets with capabilities made available to the JFACC for a given 
tasking period. 
Figure 3.2 – The standard air tasking cycle 
Direction, guidance
and objectives
Air tasking order production
and promulgation
Target
development
Weaponeering
Assessment
Execution
3.26. The air tasking cycle is built around a number of finite time phases set 
to plan and conduct air operations. The full cycle from JFC guidance to the 
completion of the execution period usually takes 72 hours. Detailed planning 
normally begins 48 hours in advance of the execution period to enable the 
integration of all component requirements. However, when appropriate, the 

63
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control
cycle can be compressed although this may come at the expense of achieving 
the most efficient use of available assets. Six phases are common and are 
outlined below. 
a. Phase 1 starts with the JFC’s objectives and strategic direction 
based on current operations. The JFACC uses that consultation, and 
the JAOP , to produce an air operations directive (AOD)48 to guide the 
subsequent planning and execution phases.
b. Phase 2 develops targets through the guidance, apportionment 
and targeting (GAT) process, which matches target development to 
tasking. Target nominations from the components are screened and 
prioritised.
c. Phase 3 sees weapon-to-target matching conducted by targeting 
personnel who match weapons capabilities to desired effects against 
prioritised targets. The final prioritised targets are given to a master air 
operations plan (MAOP) team who meld available air capabilities with 
the GAT recommendations to allocate the total number of air sorties for 
each objective or task.
d. Phase 4 is where the AOD, target worksheets, MAOP , airspace 
control plan and the requirements of other components are translated 
into detailed operational and tactical direction and promulgated in the 
air tasking order (ATO).  
e. Phase 5 is the execution of the ATO. The JFAC HQ air operations 
centre and subordinate air command and control elements execute the 
plan, revising tasking as required, and coordinating or deconflicting any 
changes.
f. Phase 6 is the evaluation of the results of air operations. The 
subsequent assessment of the effectiveness of air activity is fed back 
into the air planning cycle to inform the process.
48 T he AOD is effectively a ‘snapshot’ of the JAOP to be enacted during the tasking period 
being planned.

64
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
3
Command and control
The air tasking order 
3.27 . The ATO articulates the tasking for air operations for a specific time 
period, normally 24 hours. It enables all mission commanders to understand: 
• what their responsibilities are for their missions; 
• what tasks they are to conduct; 
• where they are to conduct them; 
• what support they are to expect or to provide; and 
• what additional constraints or freedoms they may be operating under 
during the mission. 
In accordance with the philosophy of mission command, the ATO only covers the 
‘ends’ and the ‘means’ of the mission; the tactical ‘ways’ are the responsibility of 
the mission leaders. The ATO also allows other components to conduct their own 
planning and operations based on the level of air support being provided. 
3.28. At any time, there will be several ATOs in various stages of development:  
the ATO being executed; the ATO being written; and the ATO being planned. During 
execution, the ATO retains flexibility to respond to changing priorities, including 
short-notice dynamic and time-sensitive targeting opportunities. Changes are 
made on the authority of the JFACC through the air operations centre.
Multinational air mission planning

 
Key points
• Command and control envelopes all four air power roles because it is 
essential for the effective delivery of air power.
• Centralised control and decentralised execution is the UK’s preferred 
method for air command and control; it enables tactical flexibility whilst 
ensuring unity of effort at the operational level. 
• Air operations are best delivered under the command of a single air 
commander, the JFACC.
• All air operations require a tailored air command and control system, 
centred around an air operations centre. 
• UK air command and control capabilities are primarily delivered by the RAF 
via 11 Group.
• The UK JFAC HQ provides the UK with a scalable and deployable 
command and control capability for UK, NATO and multinational air 
operations.
• Air power is best integrated with the other components of the military 
instrument during joint operational-level planning.
• The air tasking cycle is the iterative and cyclical process for planning, 
apportioning, allocating, coordinating and tasking air assets.
• The UK, NATO and US use an ATO to provide mission commanders with 
the details required to plan and execute their missions.
65
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
3
Command and control

[Page 76: No extractable text]

Chapter 4
Chapter 4 considers the application of UK air power in the 
context of an integrated cross-government approach and 
highlights how it is integrated with other elements of  
military power to conduct multi-domain operations. It 
provides an overview of key air power enablers and  
outlines air power’s utility.
67
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Section 1 – Cross-government integration and  
                   integrated action  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  69
Section 2 – Joint operations   . . . . . . . . . . . . .  71
Section 3 – Enabling air power  . . . . . . . . . . . .  77

To commit troops to a campaign 
in which they cannot be provided 
with adequate air support is to 
court disaster.
 
Field Marshal Sir Claude Auchinleck
”
“
68
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power

69
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
Chapter 4
The employment of air 
power
Section 1 – Cross-government 
integration and integrated action
4.1. Chapter 3 outlined how air power is planned, commanded and executed 
at the operational level within the air component. However, air power is rarely, 
if ever, employed on its own in response to a crisis or to achieve a national 
security objective. Air power works most effectively when integrated with other 
components of military power, benefiting from complementary capabilities 
and exploiting synergies between the maritime, land, air, space, and cyber 
and electromagnetic domains. This can be further enhanced by military forces 
being integrated and synchronised with other government departments, 
potentially alongside the use of other instruments of national power – 
diplomatic, information and economic – behind a common national goal. 
4.2. Effective crisis management requires active cross-government and 
multi-agency cooperation to develop, employ and sustain a comprehensive 
and successful response. The UK’s cross-governmental approach to 
national security, similar to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s (NATO’s) 
comprehensive approach,49 deals with a wide variety of challenges by creating 
and managing strategies to address complex problems. It employs the 
instruments of national power to achieve desired political and strategic 
objectives. The coordination and synchronisation of these capabilities 
reduces duplication of effort, creates synergies and leads to more effective 
use of resources. The UK military contribution, of which air power is a key 
component, to pan-governmental activity is delivered through integrated 
action.
49 See Allied Joint Publication (AJP)-01, Allied Joint Doctrine  for more details on NATO’s 
comprehensive approach.

70
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
Integrated action
4.3. Integrated action can be described as the audience-centric orchestration 
of military activities, across all operational domains, synchronised with 
non-military activities to influence the attitude and behaviour of selected 
audiences necessary to achieve successful outcomes.  
4.4. Air power contributes to integrated action through the exploitation of its 
attributes and roles. Using the freedom of manoeuvre provided by control of 
the air, air power can use the attack or air mobility roles to conduct outreach, 
kinetic and information activities, creating both lethal and non-lethal air effects. 
It can affect an actor’s will, understanding or capabilities in ways informed by 
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR). In addition, air power’s 
ubiquity and agility enable it to be used to exert influence without significant 
commitment; in effect, engagement without entanglement to pose or counter 
threats at range. Integrated action coordinates and synchronises:
• fires (military power effect through both physical and virtual means); 
• information activities (including regional and key leader engagement); 
• manoeuvre (the ability to remain mobile to gain advantage in time 
and space); and
• outreach (including stabilisation, support to governance and capacity 
building).
4.5. Although the effects of integrated action are primarily targeted at an 
adversary, it also has an impact on a wide range of other actors who need to 
be influenced. This can include civilian partners, such as non-governmental 
organisations, the UK population, allies and regional audiences. Therefore, 
although integrated action implies the sole use of military capabilities, it 
invariably requires coordination or integration with the activities of other 
government departments. 

71
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
Section 2 – Joint operations 
4.6. Operations in the modern world are rarely, if ever, conducted within 
a single operational domain. Historically, maritime, land and air forces have 
worked together to achieve agreed objectives.50  This joint approach to 
operations continues to underpin the UK’s ability to deliver military power 
across the continuum of competition. Joint operations conducted correctly are 
extremely effective because the various capabilities across the single Services, 
allied with non-military capabilities, can complement the strengths and 
compensate for the limitations in each, thereby creating powerful synergies. 
Air power enhances the scale of options for the joint force; through its flexibility 
and the speed with which it can reach the engagement space, it provides vital 
projection, sustainment and precision firepower, offering significant military 
advantage to the joint commander.
4.7. The emergence of the space, and cyber and electromagnetic domains 
as operational domains, rather than simply enablers for the maritime, land and 
air domains, has broadened the opportunities for the joint force to converge 
effects across multiple domains, thereby presenting an adversary with multiple 
dilemmas at a tempo that complicates or negates their response. Air power 
is ideally placed to support this multi-domain operations approach due to its 
ability to mass quickly, operate at range, target with precision and exploit an 
50 This is described as a joint operation where two or more Services operate as a single 
military force, under a single command structure, to accomplish a specific mission.
Joint personnel deploying on operations on board a Globemaster C-17

72
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
emerging opportunity rapidly. However, 
to maximise the effectiveness of air 
assets, they need to be efficiently 
integrated along, and across, all of the 
operational domains.
4.8. Effective multi-domain 
operations depend on mutual trust and 
understanding, built on well-established 
cooperation between the single 
Services. This leads the way to genuine, 
pan-domain integration, where an 
integrated approach becomes intuitive. 
The following paragraphs consider 
the key aspects of how air currently 
integrates with the other operational 
domains on a domain-to-domain basis. 
However, unlike recent operations in 
Afghanistan where the engagement 
space necessitated a focus upon 
air-land integration, the ability to synchronise air activity and effects across 
multiple operational domains simultaneously is key to deterring and countering 
the threats posed by more capable adversaries.
Air-land integration
4.9. Air-land integration (ALI) maximises the combat power created by 
coordinating and synchronising complementary capabilities from the air 
and land domains. It encompasses all the processes that plan, coordinate, 
control and deconflict the activities of the air and land components within 
a given engagement space.51 Air power takes advantage of the strengths 
of land forces, such as awareness of the land engagement space, whilst 
compensating for their limitations, such as providing additional firepower to 
help preserve freedom of action. Effective ALI requires an understanding of the 
land domain within which such operations are planned.52
51 See Air Publication (AP) 3002, Air and Space Warfare, Edition 4, for guidance on 
air-land planning considerations.
52 See Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-20, UK Land Power for more detail on UK land 
power attributes and aspects.
Apache AH1-D at low level over Norway

73
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
4.10. Whilst control of the air affords 
freedom of manoeuvre for land forces, 
effective ALI is necessary to assure 
timely air support in the ISR, attack 
and air mobility roles. Aircraft in these 
roles can be allocated to hold varying 
degrees of readiness in support of land 
forces, either on the ground or in the air 
for urgent on-call tasking. The use of 
attack in support of land forces, through 
close air support or attack aviation call 
for fire, requires a high degree of mutual 
trust and understanding, particularly in 
dynamic combat situations where there 
is no clear delineation between enemy 
and friendly land forces. Operations 
in Iraq and Afghanistan reinforced the 
need for suitably qualified air liaison staff 
at every level and, more fundamentally, 
suitably qualified joint terminal attack 
controllers (JTACs) to act as an interface between the land force elements 
and aircraft operators. The UK’s Air Support Operations Centre53  provides the 
national capability for integrating air power into land and littoral operations at 
the tactical level via three core functions: integration and synchronisation of 
air activities with joint fires and the land scheme of manoeuvre; allocation of 
allocated air assets; and joint battlespace management. 
Air-maritime integration
4.11. Air-maritime integration (AMI) is the understanding and combination of 
air and maritime procedures, capabilities and limitations to increase operational 
effectiveness. It enhances the combat potential of each. The air and maritime 
domains have certain similarities, such as scale and strategic scope, and 
sea control, like control of the air, is an essential prerequisite for freedom 
of manoeuvre. AMI is required for many operations, particularly where the 
anti-access and area denial (A2AD) threats that are faced cannot be countered 
in a single operational domain.
53 As part of the broader UK Air Support Operations Squadron.
F-35B Lightning launching from HMS Queen Elizabeth

74
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
4.12. Close coordination between ISR and combat air capabilities with 
complementary maritime capabilities can lead to significant synergies. 54  
Maritime air defence capabilities contribute to counter-air or air policing duties 
by integrating their anti-air warfare capabilities with land-based aircraft, which 
helps to establish and maintain control of the air.55  However, the effectiveness 
of such integration depends on the interoperability of individual aircraft and the 
overall combat system. Consequently, the ability to network information across 
components and between platforms from separate operational domains is 
critical to success.
4.13. The successful integration of potent capabilities, such as those 
provided by a carrier strike group (CSG), is highly dependent upon the 
liaison structure between the two components. A critical element within this 
structure for both NATO and the UK is the air operations coordination centre 
(maritime) (AOCC(M)), which coordinates the planning and tasking of air assets 
allocated in support of maritime operations and monitors their execution. 
For UK-led, or national-only operations involving a CSG, the AOCC(M) will 
usually be collocated with the maritime component commander as that is 
where it can provide the best support to both the air and maritime component 
commanders; this could be ashore or afloat.
Air-space integration
4.14. Space services provide vital 
enabling capabilities for all of the 
operational domains, the importance 
of which has been reflected by 
establishing a separate UK Space 
Command. Air-space integration is 
critical to successfully employ air 
power. The effectiveness and potency 
of aircraft operations is closely linked 
to the effectiveness of enabling space 
capabilities, such as positioning, 
navigation and timing for aircraft 
and weapons, or voice and data 
communications. Equally, air power is 
54 See Allied Tactical Publication (ATP)-3.3.3.1, Air Maritime Coordination Procedures  for 
more details.
55 Such as between the Royal Navy’s Type 45 Destroyer, through use of its air defence 
radar, in support of Royal Air Force (RAF) Typhoon quick reaction alert operations.
Ministry of Defence Carbonite-2 imaging satellite

75
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
critical to space power, for example, by providing air defence of the ground 
segment infrastructure.
4.15. Effective air-space integration at the operational planning level can also 
provide opportunities to make use of complementary capabilities. For example, 
both the air and space domains offer significant ISR capabilities, which, when 
effectively coordinated, can ensure a more complete understanding of the 
engagement space and mitigate gaps in each other’s coverage. For deployed 
operations involving a joint (or multinational) force, the nominated space 
coordinating authority is responsible for coordinating, planning and executing 
space capabilities in support of the other warfighting domains. The UK Space 
Operations Centre located at Royal Air Force (RAF) High Wycombe acts as the 
UK’s focal point for space support and integration across Defence. 
Air-cyber integration
4.16. Air-cyber integration is the use of air and cyber capabilities to create 
effects in the relevant engagement space. Air-cyber integration can involve 
cyber operations in support of air operations, or air operations in support 
of cyber operations. Air platforms and systems have become increasingly 
dependent on cyberspace and the people, processes, technology and data 
within it. Without assured access to systems such as command and control, 
maintenance, mission planning and communications, the ability of the air 
component to conduct its operations would be degraded. Commanders at 
all levels need to consider their reliance upon cyberspace and proactively 
direct measures to increase their resilience. By understanding their cyber 
risks, implementing cybersecurity measures and integrating with defensive 
cyber operations, commanders can improve their overall mission assurance 
on operations. Offensive cyber capabilities are generally considered to be 
strategic in nature with permissions for their use held either at a high level 
nationally, or outside the military chain of command. In addition, cyber effects 
can be highly classified and compartmentalised due to the sensitivity of 
techniques used and the nature and complexity of accesses. These factors are 
just some of the challenges to integration at the operational level.56
4.17. Offensive cyber operations in support of air operations target adversary 
personnel, processes, technology and data through cyberspace to increase 
the likelihood of successfully achieving air objectives.57 Data links could be 
56 See JDP 0-50, UK Defence Cyber and Electromagnetic Doctrine  for more detail on UK 
cyber power attributes and aspects.
57 The National Cyber Force plans and conducts offensive cyber capabilities for the UK.

76
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
attacked to degrade an integrated air defence system, reducing the risk to 
otherwise vulnerable aircraft penetrating hostile airspace. Integrating such 
cyber effects can help to disrupt and overcome A2AD threats, providing 
the freedom to attack targets in enemy territory. However, offensive cyber 
capabilities are likely to require tailoring to each specific target, which might not 
match the timescales associated with an air power response. The potential use 
of a cyber capability to create an effect in support of air power therefore needs 
to be considered early in the planning phase with intelligence requirements set 
as far in advance as possible.
4.18. Air operations in support of cyber operations can include kinetic 
attacks on selected computer nodes to deny an adversary a critical 
capability or force them to use networks that can be attacked or exploited 
using cyber capabilities. Such activities must be coordinated through a 
full spectrum targeting process to ensure unintended consequences are 
avoided or managed. For example, a tactical operation by attack aircraft to 
destroy a bridge as part of an operational-level air interdiction campaign may 
inadvertently undermine a higher-value, strategic cyber operation if the bridge 
is carrying fibre optics which support the networks that are being exploited.
Multinational operations
4.19. NATO is at the heart of UK Defence and, therefore, a UK national 
approach will generally be framed within a broader multinational response that 
includes allies. Alliances and coalitions provide a range of options that most 
nations could not generate independently, including unique capabilities, as 
well as potentially providing the required mass for favourable force ratios in a 
contested scenario. Whilst UK air power remains capable of delivering all four 
air power roles independently, like most Western air forces the UK has seen 
a reduction in front-line aircraft numbers over the past 20 years as the cost 
of maintaining a technological edge over potential adversaries has increased. 
Interoperability with allies, especially NATO and the United States (US), enables 
air power to be massed at the operational level and delivered at the tactical 
level via mission-specific packages of aircraft drawn from different nations; 
this is a process that is facilitated greatly by the use of NATO air doctrine and 
terminology wherever possible.  

77
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
Coalition operations in action – Libya
Operation Unified Protector was NATO’s response to a United 
Nations Security Council resolution that authorised the use of ‘all means 
necessary’ to protect Libyan civilians from the forces of the country’s 
long-time national leader Muammar Gaddafi following a widespread 
uprising in 2011. At the time, US air power was heavily engaged on 
operations in Afghanistan and Iraq and politically the US did not want to 
be seen to take a lead role in an intervention in another predominantly 
Muslim country. Consequently, a broad coalition was required to ensure 
both legitimacy in the eyes of the wider regional audience and provide 
the necessary air power capabilities – particularly in the key areas of ISR, 
air-to-air refuelling and suppression of enemy air defences, which NATO 
traditionally relied upon the US to provide. Within days, a broad coalition 
of 16 nations, including three Arab nations (the United Arab Emirates, 
Qatar and Jordan) were conducting air operations across Libya. The UK’s 
military contribution was significant and included Typhoon aircraft rapidly 
modified to conduct air-to-ground attacks. Whilst the majority of air assets 
were provided by the US, UK and France, the contribution of smaller air 
forces was key to ensuring the required number of sorties were generated 
to meet the joint task force commander’s strategy. For example, the 
Danish Air Force’s detachment of six F-16s conducted nearly 1,300 sorties, 
released 923 precision-guided munitions and cancelled no sorties due to 
maintenance issues throughout the campaign. In just over seven months, 
the Western-led air campaign allowed a group of poorly equipped rebels 
to bring about the defeat of a well-armed military and the downfall of a 
dictatorship that had spanned more than 40 years.
Section 3 – Enabling air power
4.20. The ability to deliver each of the four roles of air power is dependent on 
four critical enablers: 
• base; 
• sustain; 
• connect; and 
• protect. 

78
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
Various basing options enable rapid effect to be created across the globe: air 
logistics enable the sustainment of operations; command, control, computers 
communication and information system (C4IS) capabilities enable connectivity; 
and force protection capabilities enable the protection of forces at home and 
overseas. 
Base
A mile of highway will take you a mile. A mile of runway will take you 
anywhere.
Anon
“
4.21. Air power can operate from a range of basing options, providing 
maximum agility for operations. Basing options include the UK mainland, 
Overseas Territories, allied and partner bases, sea basing and forward land 
basing. Each has different access constraints, in terms of staging, overflight, 
force protection and sustainment, and each can provide different political 
options when projecting power globally.
a. UK mainland. UK basing enables air power to protect the UK 
mainland and respond to crises almost immediately without the need 
for deployed logistic or host-nation support. However, to project air 
power outside the UK, permission may be required to overfly sovereign 
territories. Even with air-to-air refuelling, the effective operational reach 
of current combat air capabilities is limited to Middle Eastern and North 
African regions and to project air power to any of these regions, prior 
overflight permission from European allies will be required.
b. Overseas Territories. UK Overseas Territories enable air power to 
extend its reach to regions of strategic interest without the requirement 
for host-nation support. For example, the UK base in Cyprus plays 
a pivotal role in the ability to project power in support of national 
objectives and this was most recently the case when providing UK 
air power for coalition operations over Iraq and Syria against Islamic 
terrorists. However, Overseas Territories can be particularly reliant on 
force protection and on logistic support to sustain operations. Access 
to Overseas Territories can also be reliant on overflight permissions 
from other nations.

79
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
c. Allies and partners.  Maintaining good relations with allies and 
partners enables the potential to operate from their sovereign territories 
in support of UK national or combined coalition objectives. Using 
such bases can significantly expand global reach but is reliant on 
maintaining good relations with the host nation. History has shown 
that allied bases can provide a politically and operationally sustainable 
means of enduring air operations.
d. Sea basing.  The sea basing of aircraft enables global reach and 
the ability to act unilaterally with reduced dependency on staging 
or overflight permissions. Ships can be equipped with integrated 
command and control facilities, capable of directing limited air 
operations. Sea-based aircraft can integrate with land-based aircraft 
to maximise their effectiveness. Ships are also able to loiter in areas of 
tension, drawing on the maritime attribute of poise to deter adversaries, 
react to events or reassure our allies.58
e. Forward land basing. If access can be gained to, or near to, an 
adversary’s territory and a basing option secured, it can enhance 
speed of response, persistence and concentration of support for land 
forces. Forward land basing can also be essential for force extraction. 
However, it is dependent on the available infrastructure to support 
58 See JDP 0-10, UK Maritime Power for more detail on maritime power attributes.
An RAF air traffic controller at the Royal Air Force of Oman’s Thumrait Air Base  
during Exercise Saif Sareea

80
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
the aircraft type, force protection and the ability to maintain control 
of the air in the vicinity of the base. It may also require a full suite of 
deployable enablers to generate and sustain the deployed force.
4.22. Since the end of the Cold War, most UK air operations have been 
conducted from well-found facilities, whether main operating bases in the 
UK or deployed operating bases such as those used in Afghanistan during 
Operation Herrick. Provided the threat to the airbase from an adversary can 
be mitigated, well-found bases remain the preferred choice for generating 
air power, especially for participation in large, complex, multinational 
air operations. However, the resurgence of state-based threats and the 
proliferation of A2AD capabilities places a greater emphasis on an agile 
basing approach. No single option can assure air power’s ability to achieve 
global reach. Maintaining the ability to operate across a spectrum of basing 
options, and move seamlessly between them, provides operational flexibility 
in the contemporary operating environment. Selecting the most appropriate 
operating location will be based on an assessment of the various basing 
options available, taking into account the scenario and the overarching 
context. This includes at the tactical level where the ability to temporarily 
operate aircraft from austere or civilian locations on a mission-by-mission basis 
can significantly limit an adversary’s capacity to interfere in our air operations. 
Sustain
4.23. Sustainability enables air power force elements to deploy to an 
area of operations and remain fully mission capable for a variety of roles. It 
provides the flexibility to remain on task and operationally capable for as long 
as necessary. Sustainability is defined as: the ability of a force to maintain 
the necessary level of combat power for the duration required to achieve its 
objectives.59 Sustainability is:
• one of the principles of war;
• the responsibility of commanders at every level of command;
• an integral part of the planning, preparing and executing of, and 
withdrawal and recovery from, every operation; and
• to be fully exercised in peacetime to be effective in war.
59 NATOTerm.

81
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
4.24. Air logistics is the ability to plan and execute the movement, 
maintenance and sustainment of air power. Providing a variety of logistic 
functions is a complex, dynamic and wide-ranging series of disciplines that 
can often dictate the operational tempo. It is part of the standard Defence 
Support Network, but it has a particular dependency on reachback for the 
repair and replacement of high value, complex aircraft. This generates a need 
for an efficient supply chain and sufficient stocks for contingency operations, 
which links into UK and partner nation industry.
4.25. Air logistics operations are conducted in line with the nine logistics 
principles which were adopted from NATO. These principles are: 
• authority; 
• primacy of operational requirements; 
• coordination and cooperation; 
• assured provision; 
• sufficiency; 
• efficiency; 
• simplicity; 
The RAF’s Mobile Catering Squadron provides catering support to  
exercises and operations

82
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
• flexibility; and 
• visibility.60
In general, responsive engineering and supply offsets aircraft fragility, high 
levels of equipment availability counters the cost of massing air assets, and 
rapid mobility and enabling can offer new basing options and the ability to 
rapidly enact air operations at reach. However, air logistics can also form a 
vulnerability due to its inherent complexity and the wide-spread supply base 
that is susceptible to physical, cyber, commercial and even political disruption.
Connect
4.26. Air C4IS is a key enabler for air power due to the reliance on robust 
lines of communication between a multitude of home locations and overseas 
operational theatres. Indeed, generating aircraft for air operations invariably 
depends upon the collaborative working, in near real time, of geographically 
disparate users. Moreover, effective air command and control cannot 
be delivered without a robust C4IS solution, irrespective of where the air 
commander and their staff are located. Information exchange enabled through 
data links at the tactical and operational levels enables force survivability, 
shared situational awareness and, ultimately, information advantage; all of 
these are critical to mission success in any complex, contested engagement 
space.
4.27 . The successful sharing of information and data gathered on operations 
requires a high degree of reliable connectivity and interoperability between 
participating units and platforms. Some aircraft systems also require 
connectivity to the Internet to operate effectively. The overall C4IS solution 
must enable seamless integration of information whilst ensuring only those 
who should have access can get access (confidentiality), that the information 
is accessible when it is required (availability) and that the data can be 
assured to have not been tampered with (integrity). In addition, enabling 
C4IS capabilities must be capable of being held at a readiness that matches 
the readiness of the air assets, irrespective of the number of aircraft that are 
ultimately employed. This drives a requirement for a C4IS capability that is air 
transportable, agile61  and scalable.62
60 See JDP 4-00, Logistics for Joint Operations  for more details.
61 Agile – meaning that the information system can be reconfigured to accommodate 
unforeseen changes in basing strategy, command and control arrangements, coalition 
partners and their requirements, and differing aircraft requirements.
62 Scalable – meaning they can be expanded incrementally as the user community grows.

83
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
4.28. The criticality of C4IS to generating and 
delivering air power provides an opportunity 
for adversaries and other actors to disrupt air 
operations via cyberattack. As has been seen 
with recent cyberattacks on civilian networks,63  
such methods are difficult to attribute64  and can 
be executed by malicious individuals, highly 
capable threat organisations or states. The rapid 
development of offensive cyber capabilities offers 
adversaries the potential of targeting our C4IS 
systems, which could have a significant effect on 
air power employment. Understanding the threat 
to, and vulnerability of, these systems will allow 
an evaluation of the associated risks. Identifying 
and understanding such capabilities provides 
the opportunity to develop means of protection 
through defensive cyber operations.
Protect
4.29. Air power projection relies on the protection of a network of operating 
bases, people, aircraft, C4IS networks and logistical nodes in the UK and 
around the world. Aircraft are scarce, expensive and fragile, and either operate 
from relatively large, static bases that are difficult to disguise, or from small, 
remote forward operating bases or forward arming and refuelling points. Force 
protection is required to ensure the freedom of action to operate from such 
bases and to help mitigate the strategic consequences that could arise from 
the loss of highly capable aircraft.65
4.30. An early-entry force protection capability at the outset of an operation 
secures operating bases and enables the deployment of air power. 
Subsequent air operations are protected through coordinated activities and 
measures, both on the operating base and within any assigned ground 
defence area, established beyond the airbase perimeter. Successful force 
protection relies on a detailed understanding of how the airbase operates, 
its resident capabilities and the local physical, human and information 
63 An example of such a cyberattack was the malware attack on the company computer 
network of Maersk in 2017, which severely disrupted their global shipping operations for 
two weeks.
64 Thus, perfect for sub-threshold activities.
65 Since air power can be projected directly from the UK, force protection considerations 
apply equally to non-deployed capabilities.
An RAF communications infrastructure 
technician working on an antenna in Cyprus

84
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
terrain that surrounds it.66  Air force protection measures fall into four broad 
categories, underpinned by force protection, command and control, and timely 
intelligence, which are:
• active defence, which involves measures necessary to deter, 
prevent, nullify or reduce the effectiveness of an adversary attack 
(both in the air and on the ground); 
• passive defence, which involves measures to minimise the effects 
of adversary attack, including the hardening of key facilities; 
camouflage, concealment and deception; dispersion of key assets; 
and counter-chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear activity; 
• recuperation, which covers all measures necessary for air 
capabilities to recover from the effects of an attack, restore 
essential services and enable air operations to continue; and
• security, comprising the organised systems of defensive measures 
instituted to ensure that key information, materiel, personnel and 
installations are protected against terrorism, espionage, sabotage, 
subversion and organised crime. Additionally, the criticality of 
security is reinforced by the current and future requirements for 
secure information access to enable fifth generation platform 
operations and further development.
4.31. Due to the likely criticality of 
securing an airport of embarkation as part 
of a non-combatant evacuation operation 
(NEO), and as NEOs have proved to require 
a short-notice rapid response, air force 
protection elements should be kept at an 
appropriately high level of readiness as part of 
a joint rapid reaction force.
66 See ATP-3.3.6, NATO Force Protection Doctrine for Air Operations  for more detail on air 
force protection considerations and capabilities.
An RAF Police dog handler with his military 
working dog in the Falkland Islands

85
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
Force protection in action – Operation Pitting
On 15 August 2021 following a rapid offensive, Afghanistan’s capital, 
Kabul, fell to the Taliban. In the days that followed a multinational NEO was 
undertaken; the UK’s contribution to which, Operation Pitting, became 
the largest such national effort since World War 2. Centred around the 
international airport at Kabul and involving approximately 1,000 military 
personnel, predominantly from 16 Air Assault Brigade, the UK military 
enabled the evacuation of UK nationals, embassy staff and Afghans eligible 
for relocation. Within 24 hours an airbridge was established between 
the UK and Afghanistan with RAF Voyager, A-400M, C-17 and C-130J 
Hercules aircraft conducting evacuation flights. Key to these operations 
was the security provided by 16 Air Assault Brigade, with RAF Regiment 
and RAF Police personnel providing air force protection specialist 
capabilities who, in conjunction with US and allied forces, successfully 
took control of the airport. Whilst access to the airport, as well as the city 
at large, remained under Taliban control, the presence of a capable force 
protection force enabled movement staff to rapidly turnaround and load 
aircraft unhindered. Between the start of the operation and the final flight 
on 28 August 2021, in excess of 15,000 people were flown out of Kabul by 
the RAF; including 436 people on a single C-17 flight, triple the aircraft’s 
designed capacity and the highest capacity flight in RAF history. 
Generating air power
4.32. Organisationally, the UK delivers deployed air power primarily through 
the RAF’s expeditionary air wing (EAW) model, aviation task forces provided 
by the Joint Helicopter Command (JHC) or via a Royal Navy CSG. These are 
discussed in more detail below.
a. Expeditionary air wings. EAWs provide the enabling functions 
for a deployed operating base, with or without the assistance of a 
host nation. They are scaled to meet the operational requirement, 
from a small deployment in support of one force element (potentially 
even a single aircraft) through to a large-scale deployment operating 
multiple types of aircraft covering all four air power roles. EAWs may be 

86
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
permanent to provide air power within a long-term theatre,67  or ad hoc 
in response to a specific, temporally bounded operational commitment.
b. Aviation task forces. The JHC provides rotary wing combat power 
via scalable high readiness aviation task forces (ATFs). These are task 
organised to meet the operational requirement with assets drawn from 
the most appropriate aviation organisation. To support land operations, 
the British Army’s Aviation Brigade Combat Team can generate two 
ATFs; the Commando Helicopter Force can provide an ATF to support 
littoral operations; and the Support Helicopter Force can provide an 
ATF to support air assault, air mobility, humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief tasks. ATFs train for worldwide, contested, multi-domain 
operations and act as the vanguard of JHC combat forces. 
c. Carrier strike group. A CSG is the UK term given to describe the 
capability underpinned by the Queen Elizabeth Class aircraft carriers. 
It is an integrated and sustainable joint capability, interoperable 
with NATO allies and other coalition partners. It draws together the 
coordinated operation of the aircraft carriers, combat and support 
aircraft, and enabling capabilities to conduct the four roles of air 
power.68  The Royal Navy’s Fleet Air Arm, as well as suitably trained and 
marinised69  RAF and British Army force elements can all operate from 
the maritime domain as part of a CSG.70 In addition, key international 
and coalition partners, especially other F-35B owning nations can 
contribute to CSG operations. 
67 Such as 905 Expeditionary Air Wing based at RAF Mount Pleasant in the Falkland 
Islands.
68 Within the maritime domain, the terms ‘carrier strike’ and ‘rotary strike’ are used to 
describe attacks against land targets using embarked fixed-wing and attack helicopters 
respectively. See The Fighting Instructions Book of Reference (digital) (BRd) 4487, 
Volume 2.1, Strike Warfare.
69 Marinised refers to the design, redesign or testing of products for use in a marine 
environment. Most commonly, it refers to use and long-term survival in harsh, highly 
corrosive salt water conditions. It is also taken to refer to the adaption of non-naval 
personnel to the requirements of operating at sea.
70 For attack operations the CSG operates F-35B Lightning, Apache and Wildcat aircraft 
supported by the multi-role Merlin Mk 2 for ISR support. For littoral manoeuvre and special 
forces operations, a mixed air group may be used comprising Chinook and Merlin for air 
mobility and Wildcat and Apache for attack.

87
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
Section 4 – Employing air power
4.33. In an operating environment defined by complexity and uncertainty, our 
air forces are capable of exerting air power for strategic effect across a range 
of tasks, whether deterring adversaries, delivering aid rapidly around the globe, 
building partnerships through multinational exercise participation or delivering 
decisive actions in combat. Defence is required to operate on a campaign 
basis to counter persistent sub-threshold competition, whilst retaining the 
ability to conduct combat operations above the threshold of armed conflict.71 
Whilst not a doctrinal framework, the Integrated Operating Concept72 functions 
of operate (protect, engage, constrain) and warfight provide a useful structure 
through which the employment of UK air power can be viewed.
Protect
4.34. One of the principal purposes of Defence is to contribute to the security 
and resilience of the home base. A secure home base acts as the first tier of 
71 As outlined within Global Britain in a competitive age: The Integrated Review of 
Security, Defence, Development and Foreign Policy , March 2021.
72 For more information see the Integrated Operating Concept , August 2021.
A Typhoon FGR4 intercepts and escorts a Russian SU-30 over the Baltic Sea as part  
of the NATO Baltic Air Policing Mission

88
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
deterrence by denial.73  UK air power 
plays a critical role in supporting the 
defence of the homeland and Overseas 
Territories by maintaining the integrity of 
sovereign airspace and ensuring freedom 
of manoeuvre. Typhoon aircraft are on 
permanent standby in the UK and the 
Falkland Islands to provide national 
defence and security and to assure 
control of the air through combat air patrol 
or quick reaction alert. A robust system 
of command and control is a critical 
element of this, as are our allies, who help 
provide the necessary early warning. The 
UK’s ability to rapidly reinforce the home 
base air policing posture in the event of 
a specific threat or increased security risk provides operational flexibility and a 
clear demonstration of capability to potential adversaries.74    
4.35. The ultimate guarantee to the UK’s safety is provided by the nuclear 
continuous at sea deterrent. Although details are classified, air power provides 
a key enabling role to provide sustainment, protection and intelligence. Royal 
Navy rotary wing aircraft are employed in this capacity, as are the RAF’s 
P-8 Poseidon maritime patrol aircraft, which conduct specialist military data 
gathering in support of maritime operations to deliver the nuclear deterrent.
4.36. Air power can also be employed to enhance resilience within the UK 
via support to civil authorities, usually in response to natural disasters, such as 
flooding, or to terrorist attacks. Air mobility (both rotary wing and fixed-wing) 
and ISR aircraft are of most utility and can be employed to provide niche 
capabilities that civilian agencies may lack; most recently this capability was 
used during the COVID-19 pandemic with specialist aeromedical airlift being 
used to move patients around the UK. ISR aircraft have also been used to 
provide imagery of disaster hit areas and help look for missing persons, both 
on land and in coastal waters.75
73 In this context, the home base, including its airspace, territorial waters or exclusive 
economic zone, is the UK homeland, Overseas Territories and Crown Dependencies, 
permanent joint operating bases, and key lines of communication.
74 For example, deploying six Typhoon aircraft to RAF Akrotiri in 2013 to protect the base 
from the threat of attack from Syrian aircraft. The aircraft were operational in Cyprus within 
72 hours of being tasked in the UK.
75 See JDP 02, UK Operations: the Defence Contribution to Resilience for more detail on 
air power’s role in support to the UK civil authorities.
A Chinook placing sandbags on Toddbrook Reservoir  
in 2019 in support of local authority operations to 
protect the town of Whaley Bridge

89
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
Engage
4.37. The purpose of engage is prevent conflict, build stability and gain 
influence. Engage is founded on a forward deployed and persistent posture 
that is integrated with other government departments and is engaged 
internationally with our networks of allies. Air power is well placed to provide 
influence and understanding through a variety of means. Forward deployment 
of air assets, whether temporary or permanent, is not a new concept; speed 
and reach allows the UK to deploy air power globally, either episodically in 
response to a specific situation or permanently as part of a bilateral security 
approach with another nation. For example, permanent EAWs within the 
Middle East provide mutual assurance to the hosting nations as well as 
strategic airbases from which to project UK air power.
4.38. The reputation and professionalism earned by the RAF, Fleet Air Arm 
and Army Air Corps through performance on operations means that UK 
air power is held in high regard by both allies and potential partners. The 
subsequent demand for visits, collaborative training, exercise participation, 
both in the UK and abroad, and exchange officer programmes provides the 
opportunity to exert influence and gain understanding. Such engagement not 
only improves the capacity of host nations to handle their own internal security 
challenges and establishes enduring relationships with regional military and 
political leaders but also represents a commitment that demonstrates the 
UK’s resolve. Air power can also be employed through engagement to fly the 
The Red Arrows perform above Expo 2020 Dubai

90
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
flag for broader UK government activities. Display teams such as the RAF 
Aerobatic Team, the Red Arrows, through participation in international displays 
around the world support defence export programmes and provide a visible 
demonstration of UK air power excellence to a broad audience.
4.39. Air power’s speed of response in support of disasters, such as 
earthquakes, flood or famine, can also generate a spirit of goodwill or 
alleviate previously held grievances, thereby promoting security and stability. 
Consequently, this task contributes to gaining and preserving access and 
freedom of action by building alliances and partnerships, which is vital for air 
power projection. 
Constrain
4.40. The purpose of constrain is to compel an adversary towards a course 
of action or to severely restrict the scope of their ambition or activity. Activities 
in the constrain function form an important element of deterrence; they 
demonstrate resolve and capability, as well as imposing costs on an adversary. 
Activities with the purpose of constraining allow the UK to shape the strategic 
environment in our national interest. Constrain can include the application of 
hard power in a state of armed conflict, but also below the threshold of armed 
conflict, to achieve strategic objectives when the threat demands it. 
4.41. Air power can be used to signal clear political intent through a range 
of measures, such as the overt deployment of combat aircraft to a particular 
region or intensified peacetime training exercises. It can contribute to 
stabilising a crisis situation through the airborne insertion of personnel into 
a region where conflict threatens to spill over into neighbouring states. It 
can provide implicit deterrence by deploying ISR aircraft to warn a potential 
aggressor that their actions are being watched and could provoke a response. 
Ultimately, it can also deliver strategic attack deep into an adversary’s territory 
to deny an adversary the assurance that their homeland can be kept safe. 
UK air power’s reach via air-to-air refuelling, airlift capacity and advanced 
combat air capabilities provided by the F-35B Lightning II may be employed 
to conduct, or facilitate, ‘strategic raiding’, whether as part of a joint force or 
as a stand-alone air operation. Where constrain activities escalate to broader 
combat operations, control of the air will need to be established or assured in 
a threat environment where near-peer adversaries and third parties could be 
operating air threats ranging from small uncrewed aircraft systems through to 
advanced fighters and surface-to-air missile systems.

91
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power
Countering Russian aggression in Ukraine    
On 24 February 2022, Russia invaded Ukraine in a major escalation of the 
Russo–Ukrainian conflict that began in 2014 with the annexation of the 
Crimea and the seizure of parts of south-eastern Ukraine by Russian-backed 
separatists. The UK and its NATO allies responded quickly to enhance 
Ukraine’s defence capability whilst simultaneously strengthening collective 
defence measures in Eastern Europe. Air power was at the vanguard of 
the response. The rapid delivery of defensive lethal aid by air, especially 
shoulder-fired anti-armour weaponry, proved critical to halting Russian 
armoured columns attempting to encircle and seize the Ukrainian capital 
Kyiv, thereby denying Russia a quick strategic victory. Enhanced air policing 
activity to secure NATO airspace and reassure member states in Eastern 
Europe was enacted within 24 hours of the invasion commencing, providing 
a clear deterrence message to Russia. The UK’s contribution centred around 
fully armed Typhoon aircraft operating from the UK and Cyprus which, 
supported by Voyager air-to-air refuelling aircraft, helped patrol the NATO 
airspace over Poland and Romania. In addition, the UK’s intention to robustly 
defend NATO territory and airspace against any Russian aggression was 
further demonstrated through the temporary deployment of F-35B Lightning II 
aircraft to Estonia and providing Wildcat helicopter air support to the UK-led 
NATO multinational battlegroup based within the country. UK air power 
participation in multinational exercises within the region was also increased, 
such as on Exercise Swift Response, which brought together 40 aircraft, 
including UK Typhoons and Apaches to overtly practise close air support 
missions, thereby sending a clear message regarding NATO’s capability to 
employ overwhelming force from the air if necessary. 
Warfight
4.42. A transition to a warfighting campaign is an escalation from constrain 
and is a tool of last resort. The purpose of a warfighting campaign is the 
delivery of lethal violence focused in such a manner that it compels an enemy 
to acquiesce to the UK’s or its coalition’s will. The ability and willingness 
to commit capability to fighting wars is the foundation of our influence and 
deterrence. In this scenario, the key role of air power is to defeat an adversary’s 
air forces to gain and maintain an acceptable degree of control of the air; 
without this, warfighting at scale against a peer, or near-peer, adversary is 

92
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
unwinnable. The proliferation of advanced A2AD systems mean that the UK, 
and NATO, cannot take for granted the freedom to operate in the air domain as 
has been the case during all operations since the first Gulf War. Air power also 
provides the ability to mass firepower quickly in response to an adversary’s 
attack, often while land and maritime forces marshal and deploy. 
“
Invincibility lies in the defence; the possibility of  
victory in the attack.
Sun Tzu

 
Key points
• Although air power is capable of independently achieving desired political 
objectives, it works most effectively when used with the other components 
of military power through integrated action.
• Through air power’s flexibility, and the speed with which it can reach the 
engagement space, it provides vital projection and sustainment, thus 
offering significant military advantage.
• Effective cross-domain integration depends on mutual trust and 
understanding, built on well-established cooperation between the single 
Services.
• The ability to deliver each of the four air power roles is dependent on four 
critical enablers: base, sustain, connect and protect.
• Air power can be employed across the functions of protect, engage, 
constrain and, in extremis, warfight.
93
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
4
The employment of air power

94
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
4
The employment of air power
Notes

Lexicon
Section 1 – Acronyms and abbreviations
A2AD   anti-access and area denial
AAR   air-to-air refuelling
ACA   airspace control authority
AJP   Allied joint publication
ALI   air-land integration
AMDC   air and missile defence commander
AMI   air-maritime integration
AOCC (M)  air operations coordination centre (maritime)
AOD   air operations directive
AP   Air Publication
ASACS   air surveillance and control system
ATF   aviation task force
ATO   air tasking order
ATP   Allied Tactical Publication
BAI   battlefield air interdiction
BRd   Book of Reference (digital)
C4IS   command, control, communication, computers and 
   information system
CAOC   combined air operations centre
CAS   close air support
CBRN   chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
CFACC   combined force air component commander
COED   Concise Oxford English Dictionary
CRC   control and reporting centre
CSG   carrier strike group
DCA   defensive counter-air
DCDC   Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
EAW   expeditionary air wing
EME   electromagnetic environment
95
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Lexicon

FLOT   forward line of own troops
FSCL   fire support coordination line
GAT   guidance, apportionment and targeting
GPS   Global Positioning System
ISR   intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
JAOC   joint air operations centre
JAOP   joint air operations plan
JDP   joint doctrine publication
JFACC   joint force air component commander
JFAC HQ  joint force air component headquarters
JFC   joint force commander
JHC   Joint Helicopter Command
JTAC   joint terminal attack controller
KBI   kill box interdiction
MAOP   master air operations plan
MOD   Ministry of Defence
NASOC   National Air and Space Operations Centre
NATO   North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NEO   non-combatant evacuation operation
OCA   offensive counter-air
PED   processing, exploitation and dissemination
RAF   Royal Air Force
SAM   surface-to-air missile
SCA   space coordinating authority
SCAR   strike coordination and reconnaissance
UN   United Nations
US   United States
96
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

Section 2 – Terms and definitions
This section is divided into two parts. First, we list new definitions that will be 
added to JDP 0-01.1, UK Terminology Supplement to NATOTerm followed by 
already endorsed terms and definitions.
New definitions
remotely piloted aircraft  
An uncrewed aircraft that is controlled from a remote pilot station by a pilot 
who has been trained and certified to the same standards as a pilot of a 
crewed aircraft. (JDP 0-30, 3rd Edition)
uncrewed aircraft 
An aircraft that does not carry a human operator and is operated remotely 
using varying levels of automated functions.  
Notes: 1. Uncrewed aircraft can be expendable or recoverable.  
2. Uncrewed aircraft may carry a lethal or non-lethal payload.  
3. Cruise missiles are not considered uncrewed aircraft.   
(JDP 0-30, 3rd Edition)
uncrewed aircraft system 
A system whose components include the uncrewed aircraft, the supporting 
network and all equipment and personnel necessary to control the uncrewed 
aircraft. (JDP 0-30, 3rd Edition)
Endorsed definitions
aircraft 
Any machine that can derive support in the atmosphere from the reactions 
of the air other than the reactions of the air against the earth’s surface. 
(NATOTerm)
air mobility 
A fundamental role of air power which enables movement, manoeuvre and 
sustainment. (AP3002, 4th Edition)
air power 
The ability to use air capabilities in and from the air, to influence the behaviour 
of actors and the course of events. (JDP 0-01.1)
97
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Lexicon

attack 
A fundamental role of air power which can coerce and influence actors into 
changing or maintaining behaviour. (AP3002, 4th Edition)
automated 
Pertaining to a system that, in response to inputs, follows a predetermined set 
of rules to provide a predictable outcome. (NATOTerm)
autonomous 
Pertaining to a system that decides and acts to accomplish desired goals, 
within defined parameters, based on acquired knowledge and an evolving 
situational awareness, following an optimal but potentially unpredictable course 
of action. (NATOTerm)
command 
The authority vested in an individual of the armed forces for the direction, 
coordination, and control of military forces. (NATOTerm)
control 
The authority exercise by a commander over part of the activities of 
subordinate organizations, or other organizations not normally under their 
command, that encompasses the responsibility for implementing orders or 
directives. (NATOTerm)
control of the air 
A fundamental role of air power which secures our freedom of action within the 
air environment. (AP3002, 4th Edition)
Defence engagement 
The use of our people and assets to prevent conflict, build stability and gain 
influence. (JDP 0-01.1)
fire support coordination line 
Within an assigned area of operations, a line established by a land or 
amphibious force commander to denote coordination requirements for fires by 
other force elements which may affect the commander’s current and planned 
operations. The fire support coordination line applies to fires of air, ground or 
sea weapons using any type of ammunition against surface or ground targets. 
The establishment of the fire support coordination line must be coordinated 
with the appropriate commanders and supporting elements. Attacks against 
surface or ground targets short of the fire support coordination line must be 
98
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

conducted under the positive control or procedural clearance of the associated 
land or amphibious force commander. Unless in exceptional circumstances, 
commanders of forces attacking targets beyond the fire support coordination 
line must coordinate with all affected commanders in order to avoid fratricide 
and to harmonize joint objectives. 
Notes: in the context of this definition the term “surface targets” applies to 
those in littoral or inland waters within the designated area of operations. 
(NATOTerm)
forward line of own troops 
Positions of friendly forces in any kind of military operation at a specific time. 
(NATOTerm)
intelligence 
The product resulting from the directed collection and processing of 
information regarding the environment and the capabilities and intentions of 
actors, in order to identify threats and offer opportunities for exploitation by 
decision-makers. (NATOTerm)
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance 
A fundamental role of air power, which informs the development of 
understanding across all environments. (AP3002, 4th Edition)  
Note: For coherence of terminology the next edition of AP3002 will replace 
environments with domains.
interoperability 
The ability to act together coherently, effectively and efficiently to achieve Allied 
tactical, operational and strategic objectives. (NATOTerm)
joint 
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and organizations in which 
elements of at least two services participate. (NATOTerm)
joint action 
The use of a combination of manoeuvre, fires, information and civil-military 
cooperation to create physical, virtual and cognitive effects. 
Notes: Joint action is directed by command and control, informed by 
intelligence and supported by force protection and sustainment. (NATOTerm)
99
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Lexicon

multinational 
Adjective used to describe activities, operations and organisations, in which 
forces or agencies of more than one nation participate. (NATOTerm)
operational domain 
A specified sphere of capabilities and activities that can be applied within an 
engagement space. (NATOTerm)
remotely piloted aircraft system 
A remotely piloted aircraft, its associated remote pilot station(s), the required 
command and control links and any other components as specified in the type 
design. (NATOTerm)
space power 
Exerting influence in, from or through space. (JDP 0-01.1)
sustainability 
The ability of a force to maintain the necessary level of combat power for the 
duration required to achieve its objectives. (NATOTerm)
100
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition) 
Lexicon

101
JDP 0-30 (3rd Edition)
Lexicon


Designed by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine CentreDesigned by the Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre
Crown copyright 2022Crown copyright 2022
Published by the Ministry of DefencePublished by the Ministry of Defence
This publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdcThis publication is also available at www.gov.uk/mod/dcdc


